[["Who's in, who's out: Trump's version of modern society", "May 12, 2016", "348", " So, Sadiq Khan has been elected the new mayor of London: a man who, if Donald Trump is elected president of the United States, would be barred from entering the country because he's a Muslim.Re-read that sentence. A Trump presidency. A Muslim mayor of London. A ban on Muslims entering the US (which Trump has only recently reiterated as a pledge to be delivered in his first 100 days). There is not a single element of that I could even have imagined writing as recently as a year ago.And yet I can think of no story that better distils the times; that so efficiently captures something so much greater than itself.This isn't simply the story of a Muslim, a populist and a policy. It's not even simply a story of multiculturalism and nationalism. It's the story of two completely irreconcilable, contradictory worlds that after decades of circling, are now colliding. To this end, Trump and Khan are but two more or less inevitable – even if until recently unthinkable – symbols.Sadiq Khan is, as much as anyone can be, the organic face of London. This is now a city composed entirely of minorities, its white British population having dropped below 50 per cent years ago. Something like 12 per cent of its population hails from the subcontinent, and a similar number are Muslims.That's what thoroughly global cities are like, these days. They are impossibly cosmopolitan, impossible to describe in simple caricature. They have no single culture, no single personification, not even a static identity. They are cities constantly being made and remade on the run; their only constant is their evolution and ever-expanding diversity. A city like that will eventually produce a Sadiq Khan, as it does a Boris Johnson.This is something new. Sure, London has always been global. But once upon a time that meant it was the seat of a global empire. It was global on British terms. The hierarchy was clear, even among the Empire's varied subjects.These days, it's global on the market's terms. Culture, power, hierarchy, it's all largely what money makes it. As the obscenely expensive foreign-owned apartments sitting vacant in Mayfair attest, it is becoming the world's bank; a place where the super-rich can park their capital.That kind of transformation doesn't just demand a new economy. It demands a new sociology. Every society – every village, city, nation – requires bonds of solidarity to hold it together. The great cities – London and New York chief among them – find an identity in the very fact of their dizzying diversity. It's the kind of self-image that means most voters simply fail to see an issue in voting for a Muslim candidate.Khan's electorate has a kind of effortless cosmopolitanism: comfortable with societies whose frontiers keep moving, and able to see him as merely one person among them. That's why the campaign against him – that almost boringly predictable attempt to label him a Muslim extremist – failed so terribly. It just rings so untrue to people of that city, and encourages people only to reaffirm the tolerance they value in themselves.Hence the estimation of one former Tory cabinet minister, that the anti-Khan campaign was \"utterly ludicrous\" and probably \"gave him a bigger majority\".It's simple enough – and true enough – to see Donald Trump as the equal and opposite reaction to this kind of thing. But we should perhaps acknowledge the nuances of what that means.Beneath the bigotry that so often dazzles us is the appeal to something meaningful. Trump is selling authenticity. A false version of it, sure. But a version of it nonetheless.For all the ridiculous bombast, Trump is a recognisably American character: the brash billionaire who, if you squint, symbolises the possibilities of American success. But he marries this with a kind of nostalgic nationalism that has Mexicans walled out and Muslims repelled.In doing that, Trump is also offering a kind of solidarity. But unlike the fluid, cosmopolitan solidarity shared by Khan's voters, Trump is pointing to something more grounded and static. And that's so appealing precisely because it's such a contrast from the alternative.This isn't politics as usual. Politics used to be about how we should govern society, and how power and resources should be distributed within it. This new contest is about the very definition of society in the first place; about who's in and who's out. That is, it is precisely a contest of solidarity; a contest between a global national identity, and a more parochial, ethnicised one.For a democracy, that is elemental. At a certain level, democracy is about the mutual according of rights. It requires us to put up with, rather than seek to dominate each other. But that only works when we feel some overarching solidarity towards even those citizens we don't like.Take that away, and democracy becomes a sheer, brutal numbers game. Hence the famous observation of sociologist Michael Mann that in extreme cases democracies plus ethnic diversity equals ethnic cleansing.Societies like ours, or Britain's, or the US's are simply too diverse to fall apart in quite that way. But it's also true they're beginning to fray.The US case is most obvious, but even Australia, which has been admirably resistant to the most virulent strains of nationalist politics is seeing more of it now. Hence the arrival of new fringe minor parties, anti-political fads like the Palmer United Party, and the increased influence of hard-right members of the Coalition. And we're seeing it at precisely the same time as the politics of hyper-diversity are becoming ever stronger.That's not an accident. It's a contradiction that has been building ever since globalisation became a buzzword. It's just that now it's becoming explicit in ways we weren't expecting.When Trump decided to set up an anti-Muslim forcefield around the US, he would have wanted it to keep Sadiq Khan out.Definitely not the mayor of London, though. "], ["The monstrous failure of our bipartisan asylum seeker policy", "April 28, 2016", "561", " Perhaps the most stupefying aspect of our asylum seeker debate is that we call it a debate in the first place. It's not. It's a complete political consensus. Our current policies are a bipartisan concoction; the result of years of mutual posturing, outflanking and then outbidding. \"You're banishing asylum seekers to detention centres in the Australian desert? Fine, we'll send them to Nauru for processing!\" \"You're still resettling them here? We'll banish them forever!\" \"Oh yeah? We'll get an army general to do it!\" And so on.It's hugely disingenuous. The Coalition claims sole credit for stopping the boats, never acknowledging that the most important part of its policy – the mandatory shunting of people to Nauru and Papua New Guinea, never to return to Australia – was Kevin Rudd's. The Coalition added some turnbacks and maybe some other things they've decided are top secret, but the truth is that boat arrivals slowed significant before Tony Abbott was even elected. Labor, meanwhile, is happy to blame the Coalition for whatever aspect of the policy disintegrates, never acknowledging its role in the catastrophe. That's what is particularly nauseating about watching Labor trying to make political mileage out of asylum seeker policy. And on that score, what a nauseating week it has been.\"They have botched this from day one,\" puffed Labor's immigration spokesman Richard Marles when Papua New Guinea's Supreme Court ruled our detention centre there to be illegal. But here's the problem: that centre was always illegal. It didn't suddenly become illegal when Abbott took power. Marles is right it was botched from day one, but that was Labor's day. It takes some special level of gall to establish an illegal detention centre, then insist it's the Coalition's mess.There's no great surprise here. This was such an obvious violation of the PNG constitution that the PNG government tried frantically in 2014 to change the constitution to make it legal. When the moment of truth arrived, neither the PNG nor Australian governments mounted a meaningful defence. This die was long cast. Marles' only real defence is to say this whole centre should be empty by now; that we might have got away with it if only the getaway car had turned up on time. Hence: \"PNG never imagined people would be on Manus for so long – we didn't either.\"Well, that's a monstrous failure of imagination, then. Because while it's true Labor said its Manus centre would be empty in a year, it's also true there was no plan to make that happen. It was an entirely unaccountable dream: a declaration utterly devoid of meaning. Labor never knew where these people would be resettled, once found to be refugees. It never handed the Coalition a stack of agreements with other countries guaranteeing these people would have a home. It passed on a detention regime made of matchsticks. Now it stands ready to tut, the moment things collapse.No, the real feat of imagination here would have been to pretend this could end any other way. Because the PNG Supreme Court this week did nothing more than reveal the obvious: that our policy was only ever to sweep asylum seekers under someone else's rug. It was designed to stop boats coming to us, but solve no greater problem than that. We've not brokered an agreement with our regional neighbours to share the load, because we've preferred instead to bribe the poorest nations into removing the problem from our sight. Occasionally, as in Cambodia's case, we've paid them dozens of millions of dollars for almost exactly nothing.Pursue that kind of non-policy and eventually it catches up with you. Manus is full of people already found to be refugees, stuck in a country that says it simply cannot afford to take them, and right next to one that very easily could. They're there because \"stop the boats\" – in truth a bipartisan slogan – only ever masked a question we could never answer: what happens to these people? What happens to the ones who don't die at sea, or the ones we convince to return home? Do they die elsewhere? We don't really know because the minute they aren't on boats headed for us, they cease to exist. And as far as we're concerned, their misery doesn't exist either.That's why all the stories simply wash over us. Reza Berati is killed under our care. The ABC's Four Corners program reveals that Hamid Khazaei died because the Immigration Department pointlessly delayed vital medical treatment. This week we learnt an Iranian man set himself on fire in Nauru. None of this fundamentally moves us because we've constructed an elaborate world that makes this simply the cost of doing business, rather than anything that registers as a series of tragedies we've helped create. Nothing gets in the way, except when a court uses brute force.That's when you'll find Richard Marles, not questioning how his own party's scheme could be so hopelessly conceived, but demanding Peter Dutton fly to PNG to keep this thing alive. Somehow. Anyhow. It's also when you'll find Peter Dutton responding by saying refugees from Manus \"will not be settled in Australia\". That's not even remotely an answer to the question of what we'll do now that our main policy has been quashed. But it is the only thing anyone since Rudd has ever needed to say.Except now we're being asked a different question. It's telling that PNG Prime Minister Peter O'Neill has \"welcomed this outcome\" from the Supreme Court. It's telling that he so quickly confirmed he would shut the centre. It's telling that he said the centre \"has done a lot more damage than probably anything else\". Seems even the bribery isn't enough any more. Our servants are turning and their courts are catching up with us. The design flaws of our policy are slowly being exposed. Labor can try to revel if it likes, but let's be abundantly clear: it's revelling in its own failure. "], ["Banking royal commission: Turnbull's budget policy responds to Labor's agenda", "April 14, 2016", "334", " As budget headlines go, anything involving the Australian Securities and Investments Commission is a real bore. It's nothing like, say, GP co-payments, or cuts to education or kicking unemployed kids off the dole. So, no one's blood boiled when the Abbott-Hockey budget of 2014 stripped $120 million from ASIC over five years, or when it lost more than 12 per cent of its staff from 2013.And yet this week that snore-inducing item suddenly mattered. It mattered so much that Scott Morrison began talking about reversing them, even as he is gleefully restating his determination to rein spending in.This attracted scarce attention but it's a genuinely revealing moment. It arises, of course, in the context of Labor's call for a royal commission into our banks: a call the Turnbull government (some backbenchers aside) instinctively rejects. ASIC is the figleaf for this. \"Tough cop on the beat\"; \"greater powers than a royal commission\" – all that. And yet in making this argument, the government immediately invited a smacking on how it gutted this very institution. Hence the attempt to neutralise the line of attack.And so the government is now making policy in response to an agenda led by Labor. That's about the best thing you can ever say of an opposition. It's also one of the most telling things you can say of a government. It happened to John Howard when Kevin Rudd arrived, and to each incarnation of Labor that Tony Abbott bludgeoned.Abbott's own collapse was a different matter – the result of endless self-inflicted wounds – but now Turnbull has restored the pattern. And in this is distilled the essential difference between Abbott and Turnbull's leadership: Abbott pursued a surprise agenda that offended the electorate; Turnbull has so far refused to offer one.It's a simple enough idea that Shorten might fill Turnbull's vacuum. But what makes this astonishing is how Shorten has ended up filling it. I date Labor's revival to somewhere near the launch of its negative gearing policy, to which it has since added the whiff of reducing capital gains tax concessions. Before that it announced its intentions to close superannuation tax concessions for the wealthy. Now it is rounding on the banks, buoyed by the accumulated scandals and mini-scandals from within the industry.It's remarkable enough that Labor would return to contention at the same time as it is releasing policy. That often doesn't work for oppositions as John Hewson could explain to you uninterrupted for days.But now think about this suite of policies. Superannuation loopholes aside – which even most in the industry accept aren't sustainable – they read like what, only a few years ago, would have been a checklist of crazy ideas. Negative gearing used to be the kind of thing over-enthusiastic letter-writers would scribble about. And banks? These were the inviolable behemoths of our corporate ecosystem. We could grumble about them, even fashionably hate them.Politicians would join in when, say, it suited them as a diversion from bad news on interest rates. Occasionally there might even be an inquiry, as with the Campbell Inquiry in 1981 and the 1997 Wallis Inquiry. But a royal commission? Calling them seriously into question as though they were unions? Madness, for the last 30 years at least.It's easy to see the ghost of revenge in all this. A royal commission into banks is the negative image of Abbott's one into trade unions. That incensed Labor, which thought it outrageously political. But there's more going on here because it's not an isolated jab. The thing about Labor's policies is that they're mutually reinforcing. Like them or not, they're coherent.Labor's begun doing something it has resoundingly failed to do for decades now. It's discovering a worldview, even if not yet in a very detailed way. And it's slaughtering sacred cows to do it.This is no small thing for Labor. Much has been written (including by me) about the pointlessness of Labor after Keating; of how the Hawke-Keating reforms transformed the country, but also annihilated labour politics; of how it ushered in a liberal consensus that left Labor with nowhere to go and nothing to say. But now that consensus is cracking.As the inequities of capitalism have become clearer, and as crises like the global financial meltdown seem to have dealt out pain mainly to those who had least responsibility for creating them, we've witnessed a growing popular sense of disillusionment. And every now and then, something like the Panama Papers comes along to refresh this sense that the whole thing might just be a rort: that gaping inequality doesn't mean everyone's doing better, and might instead mean money and power keep flowing to those who already have it.That's a global cynicism, visible in a diverse range of movements from Occupy to Thomas Piketty's criticisms of 21st-century capital, to Donald Trump. But in Australia it was weirdly accelerated by the Abbott government's first budget, which the electorate immediately, irrevocably and viscerally condemned as unfair. In a stroke it seems Abbott recast Australian politics.Where Howard had made principally a game of surpluses and cultural security, the backlash to Abbott's brief premiership suddenly made \"fairness\" the cardinal virtue. Indeed, Turnbull is trapped by it. By his own admission, every policy idea will have to pass that test. But that leaves him with precious few options that will please his constituency and his colleagues.In this way, the stars have aligned for Labor. Domestic politics is now centred on a Labor-ish concept at precisely the same time that a new global scepticism of the free market is emerging. As a result it finds itself roughly in tune with the domestic mood, while it has a steady stream of international stories about, say, corporate tax avoidance to bolster its campaigns.Of course, these things are only properly tested in government. But if the times came to suit John Howard, it's possible they're slowly coming to suit Labor. That's probably why it's now unafraid to call time on the liberal consensus that has made it an irrelevant political force. A consensus, ironically, it helped create. "], ["Why Australia lies to itself about its Indigenous history", "March 31, 2016", "475", " Every country has its weirdness, its reflex points that trigger spontaneous, uncontrolled actions that look almost comically irrational to the observer. It's the kind of thing you can only comprehend once you know the anatomy.Take, for example, the United States' permanent weirdness on guns. Viewed from Australia – a nation that embraced gun control with relative (though not total) ease after a single massacre – it's gobsmacking that repeated mass shootings seem only to entrench positions rather than inspire a solution.It's only when you grasp how guns have become totems of individual liberty and a principled distrust of government – and that these ideas constitute nothing less than the country's very reason for being – that you can begin to make sense of the madness.So, beneath every weirdness most likely is a revelation. Not about the substance of whatever issue is in play, but about the essence of the nation grappling with it.For Australia, it's Indigenous history. The US may be caught in a cycle of tragedy and denial, but we simply do away with the cycle. For us it's a founding tragedy, then steadfast denial ever since. The specifics might change – terra nullius, the stolen generations – but the constant is a remarkable jumpiness at the very thought of facing the past. A jumpiness so powerfully reflexive, it doesn't matter how insignificant the stimulus.This week it's a guide on \"Indigenous Terminology\" from the University of New South Wales. As documents go, it's resoundingly minor: an advisory list, likely to be read by very few people, that \"clarifies appropriate language\" on Indigenous history and culture. But that was enough to start the nation's most prolific outrage machines to humming.\"WHITEWASH\", boomed The Daily Telegraph, taking particular exception at the guide's suggestion that Australia was not \"settled\" or \"discovered\" by the British, but rather \"invaded, occupied and colonised\". This instantly triggered the talkback reflex, with lines of angry callers – historians all, no doubt – venting with all the gusto Alan Jones or Ray Hadley could inspire in them. For colour, and certainly not content, Sydney radio host Kyle Sandilands joined the party, ensuring the meltdown covered all frequencies.Where do you start? Perhaps with the Tele's remarkably sloppy allegation that \"UNSW rewrites the history books to state Cook 'invaded' Australia\". Of course, UNSW did no such thing. The reference to Cook is entirely a Telegraph invention. The guide talks of invasion but doesn't attribute it to James Cook, who had no army with which to invade. It's an extrapolation showing that not only does some editor or other know nothing about the history they're so keen to defend, but that they're also quite keen to rewrite the present.Or perhaps you might begin with precisely which historical account does the rewriting: the one of \"settlement\" with its implications of an uninhabited continent, or the one whose language of invasion and colonisation implies the significant resistance of Indigenous people and the slaughter that flowed as a result?All that history is well trodden. For now, it's the weirdness of this, and what it reveals, that interests me. Specifically: why is this hysterical response so entirely predictable? Why is it that the moment the language of invasion appears, we seem so instinctively threatened by it? This isn't the response of sober historical disagreement. It's more visceral than that. Elemental even. It's like any remotely honest appraisal of our history – even one contained in an obscure university guide – has the power to trigger some kind of existential meltdown. What strange insecurity is this?An American observing this, perhaps even while carrying a gun, would be entitled to be bewildered. Theirs is a dark history too – one that encompasses indigenous dispossession, slavery and segregation – but it's a history they can hardly be accused of denying in the way we do.Sure, indigenous American history is frequently ignored, but this is partly because it is buried beneath the sheer tonnage of black history that is so constantly rehearsed. There will be people in the US south who lament losing the Civil War, and who cling to the Confederate flag. But it's hard to imagine a public freak-out because a university wanted to discuss slavery. By now, slavery and its abolition are central parts of the American story. There might be varying degrees of honesty in the way the US tells that story, but it has typically found a way to incorporate its warts.Why do we struggle so much more? Demography, sure. It's harder to brush aside the claims of 13 per cent of the population than the roughly 2 per cent of ours that is Indigenous. But it's also a function of national mythology.The US is built on the idea of constant progress through individual liberty. It's a nation that is never finished, never perfect, but always being perfected. Its historical scars are therefore not fatal to its identity. Indeed, they are essential because they allow Americans to tell a story of their own perfectibility. In these hands, slavery is not simply a stain, but a symbol of how far they've come. So, in the process of acknowledging slavery, the US is celebrated, not condemned.We're not like that. We struggle with our history because once we admit it, we have nowhere to go with it; no way of rehabilitating our pride; no way of understanding ourselves. As a nation, we lack a national mythology that can cope with our shortcomings. That transforms our historical scars into fatal psychological wounds, leaving us with a bizarre need to insist everything was – and is – as good as it gets.That's the true meaning of the love-it-or-leave-it ethos that so stubbornly persists. We don't want to be improved in any thorough way, because for us that seems to imply thorough imperfections.Instead, we want to be praised, to be acknowledged as a success. It's a kind of national supplication, a constant search for validation. And history's fine, as long as it serves that purpose. But if it dares step out of line, it can expect to be slapped swiftly with the Sandilands dictum until it changes the subject: \"you're full of shit, just get on with life\". Then we can be comfortable again. "], ["World's elite wisdom may no longer matter as new winners create losers", "March 18, 2016", "238", " I write this from London, where Donald Trump is only the second biggest story. But it's an instructive vantage point from which to watch the Republican odyssey. In one sense, it's about the furthest place you can imagine from Trump's unvarnished parochialism. Trump probably sounds foreign to anyone not in his thrall: like the themes are vaguely familiar but the language isn't.But in London – a thoroughly global city – Trump inhabits a completely different planet. He's not merely talking strangely – something of a feat in a city that's home to more than 300 languages – he's expressing inconceivable thoughts. Mexicans (or Arabs or Asians) aren't remarkable here. London doesn't build walls. It's boundless.But in another sense, this is the kind of city that made Trump. Its increasing number of kinky skyscrapers stand as testaments to global capital: shiny, innovative. London has always had a sense of old money – how could it not with its parade of palaces and castles? Now it's just money. Money with no apparent local history, and certainly no need for it. The kind of money that is its own justification. Money that, to riff on a central Trump theme, wins.But all that winning creates losers. London is now systematically expelling its own people because, with the fabulously wealthy parking their money there, it's an increasingly rare Londoner who can even afford to rent. Soon we'll see schools unable to find teachers because no one on a teacher's salary can live close enough to work there. Turns out this glorious, boundless world has boundaries after all. It erects its walls, too, just not with Trump's bellicosity.If you're walled out in America, there's a good chance you're presently waving Trump placards. That's not merely an American phenomenon so much as a quintessentially American expression of a global one. To see that we need only glance at the biggest story in these parts: Britain's serious flirtation with leaving the European Union.That decision will be made by a popular vote in June, and it suddenly seems a close-run thing. And that's no small matter because, while Euroscepticism has always had its place in British politics, it has never been the orthodoxy.There are many reasons for the political change – including David Cameron's struggle to control his own party and the rise of the UK Independence Party – but it is perhaps most revealing to listen to the way pro-European voices tend to speak as they explain what's at stake. It's the language of economic opportunity, of radical mobility.Probe a little and you'll hear arguments about how wonderful it is to be able to relocate, without much of a thought, to take up a job – or indeed buy property – in Spain. Then France or, I dunno, Portugal, before whizzing back to London. Listening to this it sounds fantastically enticing. But then, I've just whizzed to London myself. It's roughly then that it dawns on me.These arguments all belong to the elite. It's an experience of Europe that simply doesn't ring true to the struggling classes. It's hard to value the opportunity to up sticks for the continent when it's not one that applies to you. Not everyone surveys Europe and sees a field of dreams.Millions are more likely to see a source of competition, for jobs, for houses, for everything. That's why the ugly side of this, centred on the influx of Eastern European migrants, is never far from the surface of this debate. It's not cogent – Britain's terrible housing crisis is a familiar story of undersupply and hyperactive investors, not swooping Poles – but it's a powerful enough image to stick.The themes here are closer to Trump than might immediately appear. The incessant media focus on Trump's outrages masks the fact that he's also running a seriously protectionist campaign: ironically suspicious of free trade and protective of an American underclass for whom the triumphs of capitalism seem only to flow elsewhere. It's not arguing that the system never works. It's that it always works for the same people: the establishment who write the laws for the benefits of their friends and themselves. If that's not you, chances are you feel thoroughly disempowered, whether you live in the world's most powerful nation or not.So, \"Make America Great Again\". Or to cast it in Brexit language, reclaim Britain's sovereignty, even freedom. In each case, it's really a promise of power and control. Even if those promises are completely overblown and doomed to fail (and I think they are) it's hard to deny their attraction.It's also an explicit rejection of the gospel of the last 30 years. It's a long time since we've seen mass movements in domestic politics gather around something quite that radical.That's what makes this a big moment: the sense that everything right now is up for question; that elite wisdom may no longer count as wisdom at all. Trump's politics of scandal and political incorrectness works because it's really a war on orthodoxy. And if Britain can leave the EU, perhaps it will be a sign that we're in the age of the heretic. "], ["The slow-motion death of conservative politics", "March 4, 2016", "346", " Just as well Malcolm Turnbull is such a fan of disruption. Right now, he's in a world of it. This is the week Tony Abbott's wrecking, undermining and sniping campaign went nuclear, or at least marine. His intervention on the Turnbull government's alleged delay in acquiring new submarines is about as destructively disruptive as it gets, really.Abbott has already undermined his successor on same-sex marriage (or even bullying), tax policy, industrial relations, even national security. But now even the veneer of respectful disagreement is gone. \"I'm not just disappointed, I'm flabbergasted at this decision,\" he told The Australian, before suggesting Turnbull had compromised our \"national self-respect\".He's accepted the role of disillusioned commentator on a story about a leak of classified documents. A leak, by the way, the Australian Federal Police have now seen fit to investigate. Even in the event the leak has nothing to do with him, it's a hell of a thing to dignify, and a hell of a way to do it.And so, inevitably, come the Rudd comparisons. Now, openly from his front-bench colleagues. And sure, it's beginning to look a lot like Labor. But it's perhaps a little too easy a reference point. Rudd's white-anting was really about the fury of a Prime Minister scorned; a man seeking to right a wrong through revenge. Otherwise, it had no real content. That's why when Rudd finally retook the throne, there was no policy reason given and no obvious policy consequence.I don't doubt Abbott's story is also one of revenge. But there's more to it than that. Abbott's sniping is actually about something. He's trying to rehabilitate not merely his reputation, but his entire brand of politics.That's why he's constantly choosing totemic issues to agitate: even ones for which he had no appetite as Prime Minister, like industrial relations. That's why his supporters are a crew of ideological warriors and not a reluctant collection of pragmatists as in Rudd's case. And that's why it threatens to do more long-term damage to the Coalition than even the Rudd-Gillard catastrophe did to Labor.This, I suspect, is the slow-motion disintegration of conservative politics that's bigger than Abbott, or Turnbull, or even Australia. Indeed we're seeing it most spectacularly in the United States, where, following his domination of Super Tuesday, Donald Trump is cruising towards the Republican presidential nomination.This he has achieved despite the fact almost every Republican elder opposes him. They always have. During the last election season the Republican candidates cancelled a scheduled debate when the relevant news outlet announced Trump would be the moderator. Now, some Republican heads are spitballing ways they can use party rules to deny him the nomination even though his mandate from Republican voters is so strong.This, too, is a party now out of control. But in truth it has been slowly spiralling out of control for years. Do you think Trump is heinous on immigration because he wants to build a wall to keep out Mexicans? So does the establishment's own Ted Cruz. Do you think Trump's declaration that climate change is a hoax makes him unworthy of office? Here's the other establishment candidate, Marco Rubio: \"I do not believe that human activity is causing these dramatic changes to our climate the way these scientists are portraying it.\" At least he seems to believe the science is in. He just chooses not to accept it.It's true in a sense that Trump has stolen the Republican party. But it's also true it was there for the taking. There are many reasons Trump is succeeding – anger and disillusionment among a humiliated electorate is one of them. But there's also the fact that the Republicans have been training their voters to indulge every reactionary prejudice for years. Trump simply does this better, louder, and with less varnish than his rivals. Can we be surprised when he vanquishes them? Can the Republican establishment really cry foul when he outdoes them?And is it so different here? Well, in a way, yes. A moderate is presently in the top job and the reactionary forces aren't yet taking endorsements from former Ku Klux Klan wizards (they'll have to settle for Reclaim Australia for now). But there's an important commonality too: that the contradictions that were once holding conservative parties together, and delivering them political success, have now fallen apart. The most important of these is the contradiction between liberal economics and the politics of \"values\".It's hard to be the staunch defenders of family, culture and tradition while you're also staunch advocates of things like high-skilled immigration and workplace \"flexibility\" of the kind WorkChoices offered. It's hard to believe the market should be free to exploit and commodify whatever consumers will tolerate – sex, culture, children – and yet pretend we are bound together by inviolable, sacred values.Liberal economics has this habit of being, well, disruptive. Trying to mitigate that by playing the politics of culture will eventually descend into bigotry. The more the culture being defended is hollowed out, the more it can only take the form of finding symbols to rail against. That's why we've seen such an inexhaustible parade of targets: immigrants, refugees, Muslims, greenies, gays, women, blacks, Mexicans.Every broad political movement has its contradictions. Successful ones conceal them long enough to enjoy power – and there's no doubt this neo-conservatism had its glory. But eventually, you face that moment when an earthquake turns a fault line into a canyon; when a movement's contradictions consume it. At that point it either splits, or one side becomes unleashed.There's no easy resolution for Turnbull because the disruption is deep and determined. And there's no easy response for the Republicans who must now witness what they have unleashed. "], ["Malcolm Turnbull, stop dithering on tax reform and tell us what you really think", "February 18, 2016", "320", " So after all that, turns out the most important thing right now is that we all get tax cuts. All that \"budget emergency\" stuff was apparently just a confusing prelude, consigned firmly to the past.Nowadays, budget repair is \"a Test match not a Twenty20 Big Bash\" in the Treasurer's memorable phrase of the week. Seems the required run rate isn't as impossibly high as we thought. We just need to bat time. Which is just as well because we haven't been scoring for a while now: \"We are basically in the same position that we were two years ago,\" Scott Morrison admitted at the National Press Club. Remember when the government breezily claimed it had halved the deficit? Yeah. Nah.In truth, it's a welcome moment of sense. The budget problem was only ever a midterm problem and not an emergency. And yes, tax cuts would be lovely given that bracket creep means average earners are being taxed at elite marginal rates.But it's also true that the current budget – even with its ballooning deficit – relies heavily on bracket creep to rescue it. And now, with the GST left stranded at the altar, we learn that whatever tax cuts Morrison offers will necessarily be \"far more modest\". It's hereabouts the warning signs are visible.What's the point of all this, exactly? Precisely when, and exactly why, did tax cuts become the pillar around which the Turnbull government's budget plans would revolve? Why are they more important than, say, funding the hospitals and schools which the states insist they simply cannot afford to keep running? Or more important than reducing the deficit? And if they really are that important, for whatever barely explained reason, what's the point of making them so modest?There might well be answers to these questions. But one of the key lessons of the Turnbull government's failed GST foray was that it seemed remarkably uninterested in providing them. Yes, a raised GST wasn't popular. But it was more popular (37 per cent) than the Labor Party, whose primary vote is (up!) at about 29 per cent. It wasn't, therefore, a necessarily lost cause.The problem was that no one – including several on the Coalition backbench – knew why we were even thinking about raising the GST. The GST conversation very quickly became one in which we were being asked to pay a price, for no clearly identified benefit. How was that ever meant to succeed?What's missing here is Turnbull's story. His explanation of what matters and why; of what is worthy of our sacrifice and what exactly we're trying to achieve. It's not really precise enough to criticise this as a do-nothing government. It's more a go-nowhere government right now.Floating ideas – perhaps even good ones – but to no obvious end; with no unmistakable direction. It's a government as yet without a purpose. It has a series of positions it inherited from Tony Abbott – on climate change, same-sex marriage most famously, but also on things like welfare cuts for low-income families that everyone has forgotten about but which remain part of the government's budget.Mostly, though, it has a table with lots of things on it. \"Everything\", in fact. Except the stuff, like the GST that suddenly isn't. Now Labor's put together a negative gearing policy which Morrison reckons is silly, but has chucked on the table anyway. Open-mindedness is fabulous. But not if there aren't any criteria to figure out what ultimately to accept.Labor, meanwhile, is strangely coherent. More coherent than it has been in years. It's systematically going through tax concessions and loopholes that favour big companies and wealthy people, and pledging to capture that money to spend on wildly popular things like the hospitals and schools mentioned above. Leftovers will be used to reduce the deficit.No one's listening, of course, which masks the fact that right now, the Turnbull government is being comprehensively outdone on policy. Not necessarily in the sense that Labor's policies are better – indeed you're free to detest them. More in the sense that Labor actually has them. And that it has a simple story to tell about them. It's a strange look, this. An anonymous, invisible opposition offering politically risky policies as though it's a secure government, and a politically secure government playing small-target politics as though it's in opposition.Of course, none of this means Turnbull will struggle at this year's election. He won't. Forget this week's murmurings that his honeymoon is now in eclipse; that the parade of ministerial scandals and departures and party divisions have rendered us newly sceptical. He'll win easily as almost everyone in Labor expects. But as Abbott so powerfully showed us, winning an election doesn't necessarily mean much. If you have no mandate, no clear reason for being, you'll quickly find you've snookered yourself.Abbott's position became unsalvageable because his opponents had a stronger story about him than he had of himself. And Abbott, having pledged only to abolish taxes while making no cuts to anything and somehow fixing the budget, had no way of recasting himself as something electable.Labor will paint Turnbull as the Prime Minister who is happy to sacrifice health and education for the ability of wealthy people to gain investment properties; or for the sake of \"modest\" tax cuts you'll barely feel; or for something else like that. It will lose, but it will plant a seed.And if Turnbull doesn't take advantage of his impregnable position to hammer a world view of his own, he might at length be strangled by the weeds. "], ["Nauru: How long can we keep lying to ourselves?", "February 5, 2016", "415", " Wonderful idea, sovereignty. It conveys this reassuring sense of control; a sense that on each of our own patches, we're in charge and things happen by some exercise of our own free choice. And maybe that sense isn't an illusion. Maybe, for example, Nauru just happened to choose to open a \"regional processing centre\" for asylum seekers. And maybe it just happened to put an Australian government office in it. And maybe it just happened to ask the people in that office – who just happen to be Australians – if they could wear Australian government uniforms with the Australian coat of arms on them while they deal with the detainees in that centre.Maybe it's mere happenstance that Nauru has made visas all but impossible for journalists to obtain if they want to scrutinise these detention arrangements, in a manner eerily similar to the way the Australian government routinely denies journalists access to our own detention centres.Maybe that same happenstance accounts for the fact that the single journalist to have been the exception to this rule in the past two years is a dedicated supporter of the Australian government's asylum-seeker policies.And maybe Nauru's sudden decision to open the gates of its detention centre so its detainees could roam freely around (but not leave) Nauru had nothing whatsoever to do with the fact that the Australian government was – at precisely the same time – in danger of losing a case in the High Court that would bring its offshore detention regime crashing down.And maybe all that has absolutely nothing to do with the fact that the Australian government pays for that centre. And nothing to do with the fact under our government's agreement with Nauru, we have the right to step in and take over the centre whenever we like. Maybe all this is some completely free, unbounded choice of Nauru's that miraculously happens to coincide with the Australian government's interests again and again.So maybe it's true that while the arrival of boats of asylum seekers in our waters is severe enough to mean people smugglers are robbing us of our sovereignty, our own official, uniformed control of Nauru's detention centre somehow leaves theirs perfectly intact.Or maybe that's all crap. It matters because whatever it is, we're building our asylum-seeker policy on it. That has been true for years now. Perhaps you've noticed how often when controversy arrives, say in the form of some act of abuse in these detention centres, these things become matters for Nauru. Nauru has become a screen behind which we hide our own culpability; its sovereignty a charade, really – a sort of legal fiction we use to obscure the consequences of our own policy even as we claim its successes.This week we learned those consequences might have included the rape of a five-year-old boy. And this week, the High Court confirmed the government has every legal right to send him straight back to the scene of that alleged crime. And who could honestly claim to be surprised if the government did exactly that?The horror of this thought is obvious. But perhaps the greatest horror is that as a nation, we've now become so hopelessly addicted to the fictions that justify it. It's not just the fiction of Nauru. It's also the fiction of Australia, which you might recall we've declared simply doesn't exist if you're coming here by boat. You can dock in Sydney Harbour if you like, and as far as the law is concerned, you simply never arrived here. But there's also the fiction that Nauru and Papua New Guinea were ever anything more than a dumping ground for us.If these countries were truly something more, we'd have known from the beginning how the asylum seekers we were sending there would be resettled. Or indeed that it was going to happen at all. But there was never any plan. There still isn't. The \"regional processing centre\" in Nauru seems drastically misnamed given precious little processing is actually happening. Remember last year when we heard the 600 remaining detainees on Nauru would be processed within a week? Many weeks on, 537 remain.This as we've paid Cambodia $55 million to resettle almost nobody (or four nobodies to be precise). And while we've been belatedly scouring the region looking for countries to take asylum seekers off our hands, we've flatly rejected an offer from New Zealand to resettle 150 of them each year. Resettlement in New Zealand, you see, would encourage more boats.Note, here, the tacit admission that our policy is to send them to places so bad they couldn't possibly want to live there. Only then, it seems, will they stop coming. It's a problem that goes back to the very inception of this policy, implemented in the last throes of Kevin Rudd's political career. Labor's present objection that people were not meant to be \"languishing in indefinite detention\" is so profoundly hypocritical because it ignores that the Rudd government had never arranged anything else.Ultimately, this whole issue exists in a world of make-believe: make-believe borders, make-believe compliance with the refugee convention, and make-believe resettlement policy. Among all the moral injuries we've inflicted on ourselves in this sordid area of politics – and there are many – the most overlooked is how adept we've become at lying to ourselves.One day, when the history of this period is written, it will be a story of how successive governments have legislated their lies. How John Howard, then Julia Gillard made real their pretence that boat arrivals never got here, so we could be good international citizens yet still owe these people nothing. How Tony Abbott passed a law in June last year to ensure Rudd's Nauru arrangement was legal, and how that law pretended it had been in force ever since 2012.I don't know if we can do this forever; if eventually our lawmaking won't be able to outrun our lying. But I know that buried in this week's High Court judgment is unanimous agreement the government simply cannot detain people indefinitely on Nauru. At some point, the clock runs out. And on that day, maybe the alarm will sound on these mighty fictions that have been sustaining us. Then who will we be? "], ["Why Mosul’s Sunnis find Islamic State death squads the lesser of two evils", "January 21, 2016", "263", " I guess leaders of Islamic State are fiscal conservatives. This week we learnt they recently decided to slash salaries in the public service – in their case, fighters – by half. Apparently IS doesn't do deficits. So, confronted by plunging revenue and losing cash rapidly, it could only implore its people to sacrifice for the cause.This is excellent news for several reasons. First, it reflects an enterprise in trouble.IS doesn't detail the \"exceptional circumstances\" that make the pay cut necessary, but they're simple to discern: significant losses of land – up to 40 per cent of what it held in Iraq and 20 per cent of its Syrian territory – including much of its money-making gas and oil fields. Moreover, things are only becoming worse. IS famously lost Ramadi last month, and last week saw something in the order of tens of millions of dollars literally blown up when a US air strike hit a cash facility in Mosul.Second, the lower pay threatens to harm the organisation's recruitment. That might surprise those convinced IS survives on the kind of fanaticism that does not need to be bought, but this oversimplifies the nature of IS, which is not merely a collection of ideological diehards.It's easy to forget that in addition to its dedicated Islamists, IS is a home for sizeable chunk of Saddam Hussein's men who, after the United States invasion, found themselves excluded from the new Iraqi government and with nowhere to take their (often brutal) skills. The Islamic State leader, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, formed alliances with many of them while he was in prison. Indeed IS probably couldn't exist without their expertise, acquired over years working for Saddam. Not so very long ago, these people were secularists – more particularly, Arab nationalists. For them, IS represents little more than a way back to power.Radical groups are often affected by impressively mundane factors. Al-Qaeda, for instance, suffered infighting and resignations when Ayman al-Zawahiri (then Osama bin Laden's deputy) halved salaries and ordered his followers to cease spending on anything that was not an emergency. Members complained of being given only $30 a month to pay for housing, or of being driven broke. Another felt so aggrieved, he embezzled tens of thousands of dollars.Beneath the austere, self-consciously pious veneer of such organisations is something far more ramshackle – susceptible to the same power plays and jealousies as, say, any political party. That's why IS so pointedly insisted its pay cut would apply to everyone without exception, \"whatever his position\". It fears some manner of rebellion if more senior fighters are seen to receive favourable treatment.This underscores perhaps the most important truth of IS: that it ultimately succeeds or fails for political reasons. Its support depends upon its ability to present itself as the only viable alternative for Sunni Muslims in the region. It so infamously took Mosul in 2014 because that city's Sunnis simply declined to put up a fight. They feared Iraq's Shia death squads more and saw the Iraqi government in Baghdad as a force for sectarian repression. IS, which promised to slaughter the Shia, seemed preferable to Sunnis than the Iraqi government, which promised to watch while militias slaughtered them.So when IS docks people's pay, it matters because it signals its weakness and damages its claims to being able to protect Sunnis. And in crassly commercial terms, it makes its offer to prospective members less compelling. In this respect at least, the US-led airstrikes are working.But in other important ways, they aren't. Around the time IS made this decision, the Washington Institute published a remarkable opinion poll of people living under IS in Mosul. The results show that although a majority would like IS to leave Mosul, and declare that IS is not representative of their views, support for IS has grown markedly in the past six months or so. More than half now say their lives have improved since IS took control. In June last year that figure was only 21 per cent.Meanwhile, about 40 per cent now say IS reflects their views and interests: a 400 per cent increase since June. It's unlikely these figures are entirely accurate, but the trend is clear.And it's also clear why. Of those who would prefer IS to stay in Mosul (39 per cent), only a third actually support them. The rest simply distrust the US, the Iraqi government or Kurdish militias too much. More people now regard US air strikes as the biggest threat to their family's security than see IS the same way, and a large majority are also worried about Shia militias. Put simply, the people of Mosul feel trapped. Unable to trust the Iraq government, and terrified of both American air strikes and Shia militias, they are more or less back where they were 18 months ago when ISIS rolled into town: sizing ISIS up as the least worst option.Put simply, in the most predictable way the military campaign is making IS more popular among those living under their control, at least in Mosul.That's what happens when military action is divorced from political strategy: your military gains develop a nasty habit of undoing themselves. US President Obama intuits this, hence his recent State of the Union exasperation: \"Our answer needs to be more than tough talk or calls to carpet bomb civilians\".But it's unclear precisely what more the US-led coalition had in mind when it commenced this campaign. That's a problem apparently Malcolm Turnbull comprehends as he attempts to withstand subversive pressure from his own party to throw more soldiers into the Middle East.But there seems sadly little urgency in fleshing this out. Amid the sporadic debates about increasing our military involvement – amid the Palinesque outbursts, the Trumpian bravado and the more subtle provocations of the Abbott faction – it's as though we've forgot to debate our political strategy: how we'll win the trust of the Sunnis living under the IS neo-Jacobin regime; how the inevitable contests for control of this land will be resolved; and what exactly will hold a post-IS region together.These aren't luxurious, esoteric considerations that follow the \"real\" issue of our military involvement. They're the very guts of the issue. And if you're going to argue for expanded war, the price of admission should be nothing less than an argument with the politics fully considered. If only those who refused to pay it could have their salaries halved. "], ["Attacks by Tony Abbott, Donald Trump: Arch conservatives offer nothing but guff", "December 10, 2015", "492", " Sorry, but I just can't quite get over the irony. Unless I have this completely mistaken, Tony Abbott just called for both a Reformation and a revolution \"within Islam\". This is, of course, perhaps the most well-worn and ill-informed cliche of Western discourse on Islam – the kind of thing people like to say when they want to sound serious but know almost exactly nothing about Islam, Muslim societies, or indeed the Reformation.But it takes on a special instructive quality coming from Abbott: a self-described conservative Catholic. If that description has an antonym, it's something like a revolutionary Protestant: pro-Reformation, pro-revolution. And yet here is our former prime minister, arguing against his very self.Unless, of course, he isn't because when it comes to Islam, all the normal rules are suspended. Including, it seems, whatever rules require that the words we use are meant to have meaning. So much could be said here. Of how Islam's own version of the Reformation already occurred in the 18th century. Of how this episode gave birth to Wahhabism, with its disdain for traditional religion and its austere scripturalism. Of how that finally became expressed in the nation state of Saudi Arabia. Of how it combined with the anti-colonial movement of Islamism – self-consciously a reform movement, by the way – to create (eventually) al-Qaeda and through it Islamic State. And of how we should hardly be surprised that Islam's Reformation has turned so bloody and so ugly given that Christianity's Reformation claimed somewhere between 5 million and 15 million lives in the French Wars of Religion and the Thirty Years' War alone.What Abbott (and new MP Andrew Hastie, and Energy and Resources Minister Josh Frydenberg – hell, you can add names of your own to the list) simply fail to understand is that the Reformation is here. They're looking at it. The Muslim world – and indeed Islamic thought – is in crisis. It has been probably since the late Ottoman era, and it was compounded by the utter destruction of its main institutions of religious learning in the colonial era. But its affliction has nothing to do with needing a Reformation. It's about a people now thoroughly disconnected from their own tradition. The Muslim world's affliction is amnesia.I could go on like this (and I have), but the truth is there's no point. Because this isn't really a conversation about Islam. It's too transparently political – and theologically illiterate – for that. The more interesting story here is one of a collapsing brand of politics; a politics compulsively lashing out as it becomes ever more marginal. Indeed a politics that seems to be taking pride in that marginality. Hereabouts, I give you Donald Trump.\"We need a total and complete shutdown of Muslims entering the United States while we figure out what the hell is going on,\" Trump boomed this week. It's a fascinating intervention because it's so completely unvarnished, but it's also the logical extension of all this Reformation guff.If the problem is an un-Reformed Islam then it follows that un-Reformed Muslims are intrinsically a danger. And if that Reformation has never existed, then it follows that all Muslims (or religious ones, anyway) are un-Reformed. Follow the syllogism and you'll get to Trump eventually. And that's where the brand of politics comes into focus. Trump hates Muslims, and clearly trades on it.But he apparently also hates Mexicans and women. Moreover, he hates them all in the most scandalous way, and I suspect that's the point. Trump is interesting precisely because his politics is all about scandal. He's transforming rank prejudice into virtue. Any scandal only proves his bona fides. So every criticism becomes just another case of political correctness to which he can respond, as he did this week: \"But. I. Don't. Care.\"It's the not caring that is thrilling. Just as for Abbott, it's the \"straight talking\" that is the brand: \"We can't remain in denial\" he writes because it allows him to cast himself as clear-eyed and brave rather than historically loose and analytically incoherent. This is the politics of hairy chests; the politics that self-consciously gives the finger to the niceties of postmodern society. And especially, the politics that holds the full range of shadowy threats at bay – from Muslims to the PC brigade. Islam is just another symbol in this world; just another enemy of the imperilled order. It signifies the West's cultural decline: its capitulation to the cult of diversity and minority rights.The politics that (inaccurately) describes itself as conservative has now been reduced to such obsessions. It pretends to preserve and defend a culture, but notice how it never really enacts it. There is always much talk of values such as \"decency and tolerance\", but it's a real struggle to recall exactly how that was practised at crucial moments or under any stress. On climate change, or asylum seekers, or budget reform or international relations, the message was always one of aggression.The Abbott government – and now what we might call the Abbott opposition – was forever hunting enemies. At most it packaged aggression as compassion, but it was always aggression. That is the only mode it has. It has no traditional moral language; nothing that richly evokes concepts like empathy, courage, sacrifice, restraint, forgiveness, forbearance, humility.The real giveaway in this brand of politics is not that it speaks forthrightly about Islam. It's that it seems to be able to do nothing else (or maybe little else once you add the formulaic hectoring of climate change). It's the kind of discourse that has nothing much to say even about Christmas unless it can become a story of how political correctness (or Muslims, or both) are destroying it.I don't doubt this serves a purpose. I don't doubt Trump appeals to a sector of society that feels utterly excluded by the hyper-diversity of our age. I understand – and am even sympathetic to – the now hopeless desire for some kind of cultural consensus that can bind a society.But it is telling that self-described conservative politics cannot offer even that any more; that it can only offer a parade of enemies by way of substitute; that it simply cannot tap into a positive register. It's as though it has forgotten itself. As though it has suffered through its own unfortunate Reformation. "], ["Islamic State is a bit player in a much bigger fight", "November 26, 2015", "288", " Amid the relentless focus of this past fortnight, it was possible to believe in a global consensus on the fundamental importance of destroying Islamic State. Putin and Obama reconciled enough to confer earnestly, while France simply khakied up and pounded Raqqa. But then Turkey shot a Russian plane out of the sky and reminded us of the complexities of this mess.The Middle East has now become the political equivalent of an Escher drawing; a canvas on which irreconcilable perspectives gather, and where everything is more important than everything else.The perhaps shocking fact is that IS exists only by indulgence. The indulgence, in the first place, of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad who responded to IS's arrival in Syria with acquiescence. It's easy to forget that back in 2011, as the Arab uprisings rounded on Assad, he dismissed his protesters as terrorists and foreign agents as a way of justifying his brutal response, and convincing the world to leave him in power.At the time this was bollocks – little more than a page spoken verbatim from the dictator's playbook. But over time IS became a prize gift. Much of its violence was directed not at Assad, but at the Syrian opposition who had taken control of Raqqa. In fear, many of them ended up joining IS, and IS eventually took hold of the city Assad had lost anyway. Until 2013 IS and Assad were content to play wide of each other in what David Kilcullen recently described as \"a de facto truce\". In short, IS made Assad's lie come true.The indulgence, too, of Iraq. This is not to deny the rude shock last year when IS screamed onto the world stage by taking Mosul, Iraq's second-largest city. But Iraq as we knew it no longer exists. The north, which IS controls, is a different country now. The Sunnis living there have little desire to be part of what they consider to be a repressively Shiite state governed from Baghdad, and the southern Shiites seem equally content to cut the Sunnis loose.We don't talk much about Baghdad any more, partly because life is more normal and mundane there than it has been in years. Investment is up, and suicide bombing is down. Television airs sitcoms ridiculing IS and pop songs do the same. As Nicolas Pelham recently wrote in The New York Review of Books, southern Iraqis talk about IS in the past tense. Even if the Iraqi state could launch some military assault on the north, you get the distinct impression it couldn't be bothered.Then there's the indulgence of Turkey, which was happy to let Sunni terrorists pour over its border into Syria for years when IS was just a lad. Here, Turkey had two interests. First, to facilitate any opposition to Assad that it could. And second, to ensure its Kurdish population couldn't use the chaos to establish their own proto-state. Turkey is now a mirror image of Russia: a proud, once-imperial nation led by a macho aggressor determined to entrench its interests, subdue its separatists and act on behalf of its ethnic brethren.So, as Russia nicked Crimea off Ukraine in the name of protecting the Russian-speaking population, so too is Turkey enraged at Russia's air strikes on Syria which drop bombs on ethnic Turkmen. Russia, meanwhile, cheerfully bombs anyone opposed to Assad as a way to preserve him and maintain its own regional power. So for Putin, IS is simply convenient rhetorical cover that allows him to bomb whoever stands in Assad's way.No one likes IS, but everyone ultimately has greater, conflicting concerns. Partly that's because most nations recognise IS has no air force, no history of military victories against capable enemies and controls a largely empty swath of land, which it has recently commenced losing. Western nations might be keen to see that process complete itself, but the truth is they have little appetite for making it happen.Western populations have tired of war – a fact reflected in an Essential poll this week revealing that even so soon after Paris, fewer than a third of Australians want to see us step up our military involvement. But even more seriously, there's the stench of futility here. That same poll has only 17 per cent of us believing it would even make us safer if we did, and 45 per cent believing the opposite.That's why it's hard to see us rushing into a full-scale war. Sure, we could crush IS, but what then? Would we end up delivering land to the Kurds, and enraging Turkey? Or back to Assad, which would bolster Russia's power and entrench a dictator whose own body count simply dwarfs IS's? And what of the far likelier result that the land ends up contested by scores of warring groups engaged in an encore performance of the carnage in Iraq that gave birth to IS in the first place?In the visceral urge to smash things after Paris, you can overlook the fact that whenever we've tried to use our armies to smash terrorism we've generally scattered it all over the world. Remember when US president George W. Bush said we were fighting terrorists in Baghdad so we wouldn't have to fight them in Boston? And remember how, not so long ago, bombs went off in Boston? The idea that we can gather terrorism in one place and then destroy it is now surely one of the most demonstrably wrongheaded of our age.It takes a special kind of ideologically induced amnesia to ignore all this. It's an amnesia that takes centre stage in the American Republican party and the lunatic fringe of our own Coalition. But if Malcolm Turnbull is to be believed, this amnesia is not taking hold of Western leaders more generally. That's because they understand IS isn't a player. It's the Middle East's illegitimate child: a byproduct of the power vacuums of a broken region. It exists because it gets lost amid the much bigger fights going on around it – you know, between armies that actually have planes to shoot down. And you can do what you will to IS. Until those bigger fights are somehow resolved, there will always be a byproduct. "], ["Drones: the killing is cheap but the price high", "May 31, 2013", "123", " With great power comes unaccountability. Until now the Western world, under the cover of the world's sole superpower, has scarcely needed to engage with the ethics of using armed drones. Occasionally, a drone strike would make the news. Occasionally, some commentator or other would gnash teeth. Almost always anti-American anger and resentment would grow in the countries where the strike happened. But ultimately, no one can actually do anything about any of this. So, overwhelmingly the Obama administration gave no answers to questions that weren't asked.But all that's changing. US President Barack Obama has just confessed that using drones is not ''wise or moral in every instance'', and that they should be used as a last resort. This is largely a response to growing US discontent about his administration's mysterious drone program. We now know that American drones have killed four of the country's own citizens. So the President is asking Congress to help him develop some kind of oversight for American drone use to ensure they are used only against people who are ''a continuing, imminent threat to Americans'' and cannot be captured.Obama's reckoning with the ethics of drones is welcome. But what if it's too late? What if he's unleashed a mode of warfare he cannot control, and we'll come one day to regret?It seems inevitable that lots of countries – including ones that make the West uncomfortable – will soon enough have drones of their own. Perhaps the most overlooked story of the year comes from China, where the People's Liberation Army hatched a plan to send a drone to Myanmar to assassinate a drug trafficker who had murdered 13 Chinese nationals. As it happens, the Chinese government didn't go ahead with it, but not because it couldn't. In fact, China is developing quite a fleet. And it has plans to share them around.A US drone costs anywhere from $5 million to $10 million. Depending on who you believe, China can build them for less than $1 million. If that's true, you can forget any idea of an American monopoly on the drone market. Now consider China's customers: countries who want cheap weapons, and who'd rather not buy them from America or Israel. Really, anyone in the developing world is a candidate. It's hard to resist the conclusion that we're staring at the future of warfare.Is that a bad thing? To date the arguments for and against drones have focused on civilian casualties. Put briefly, critics claim a high civilian toll from the American program, while its defenders claim drones have greater precision, get into places that soldiers can't and, therefore, limit what is so grotesquely called ''collateral damage''. The focus on civilian deaths is noble, but for now at least the argument is futile. The truth – indeed the very problem – is that we're almost completely in the dark on this.No one knows how many civilians have been killed. The British-based Bureau of Investigative Journalism puts the number at more than 1000, but there's no way of knowing. The US government hints that the figure is lower, but won't give one of its own, and even if it did it might not mean much.But even if we could get a reliable figure, it's unclear precisely what it would mean. The problem here is that we're dealing with a counter-factual. How many civilians would have died if conventional weapons were used instead? How many (if any) of these  strikes would not have gone ahead if drones weren't available? Again, we can't say. And, sadly, we're in an era when civilian deaths are deemed an acceptable inevitability of war, rather than a reason to avoid it.Whatever the truth of these claims and counter-claims, perhaps the best objections to drone warfare have nothing to do with pragmatic arguments over counting  bodies. The central problem is drones permit a kind of no-risk, low-cost warfare. Indeed, they so radically and fundamentally alter the nature of war that they risk making war seem far less grave, and far easier to wage.War is a kind of contract. Each side confronts the other, with the risk of death and defeat. In short, war should come at a cost. That contract is shredded when you're attacked by something that cannot itself be killed. It's not remotely a fair fight. It's scarcely a fight at all. For all the horror, pain, and gore of the battlefield, there's something to be said for it. It's one of the very best reasons every nation has not to go to war. The greater the sacrifice, the graver the decision to fight. That's why the Vietnam War – fought by people conscripted into the army – was so much more toxic for the US government than the Iraq War. You're more likely to proceed with a strike based on sketchy intelligence if you're risking only the lives of faceless civilians, and not any of your soldiers. The prospect of waging a war without sacrifice is a  frightening prospect. It makes war that much more disposable; that much closer to being waged on a whim. And no gesture of congressional oversight is going to change that.Is this the kind of calculus of war we want? The historical record suggests our every military development seems to have made war less and less costly for those waging it, with horrific results. Once, rulers risked their own lives on the battlefield. Then the lives of ordinary citizens, called up by conscription. Now they risk the lives of professional soldiers who make the choice to get in harm's way. And in the meantime the ratio of civilian casualties to those of combatants has ballooned. "], ["Tory politics: pact to the rafters in contradiction", "May 17, 2013", "113", " At the risk of blaspheming, allow me to contend that there is something more important in politics than who has power and for how long they will retain it. Power, after all, is a means. Its meaning lies in how it is used, not in who is using it. So let me propose an alternative way of understanding politics: ask not who is winning and losing, but rather who is asking the questions, and who is being forced to provide answers.In that connection, two remarkable things have happened this week. The first was the federal budget, which announced an $18 billion deficit, cut back on handouts, took more in tax, and funded enormous projects in education, infrastructure and disability services. It's astonishing because until now, this government's budgets have been overwhelmingly about answering one question: when will you deliver a surplus? That is the Coalition's question. For some reason, the government felt compelled to answer it. That might have changed on Tuesday night.The second was a gobsmacking poll published in The Guardian that showed support for the anti-European UK Independence Party has doubled in the space of a month. Doubled! It's now polling at 18 per cent - ahead of the Liberal Democrats, who are the junior partner in the governing coalition - and only 10 points behind the Tories. Of those who voted Conservative in the 2010 elections, a whopping 27 per cent are now parking their vote with UKIP. This is like Katter's Australia Party polling well ahead of the Greens and within striking distance of the Coalition. British pollsters haven't seen anything like it for decades, or perhaps at all. Now Prime Minister David Cameron is going through all sorts of contortions to placate his euro-sceptic backbenchers. He might be in power, but he's answering to UKIP.At first blush, both these developments tell the story of government in crisis. In Cameron's case that much is obvious. In Wayne Swan's case, it is as though he has accepted his impending demise, shelving even the customary attempt to win back the electorate with cash. But I think something bigger is slowly being revealed. Something about the nature of modern conservative politics.Let's begin in Britain. You'd presume UKIP's rise meant Britain was caught in the grip of a raging anti-European fever. Actually the proportion of voters who want to quit the EU has dropped since January, and not even 10 per cent think it's the country's most pressing concern. No, UKIP's success is not really about Europe. It symbolises a kind of anti-politics. Theirs is the ultimate protest vote, based on a sense that the major parties have nothing to say to them.That is not merely a British feeling. In America, the Tea Party has a clearer ideological purpose, but nonetheless trades heavily on its disdain for Washington insiders. And in Australia the analogy with Katter's Australia Party suggests itself. The mobilising issues vary, but the fact these movements sit on the conservative side of politics means their disillusionment is most clearly directed at what modern conservative politics has become.Namely, it has become synonymous with the free market. Indeed, the ideological victory of market liberalism is frequently cited as conservative politics' most decisive modern victory. But the fact that it was ostensibly conservative leaders like Margaret Thatcher and Ronald Reagan who led the free market charge conceals the fact that, actually, this kind of market ideology isn't very conservative at all.It undermines exactly the kinds of social institutions conservatives celebrate - family, for instance - by making us work more irregular and unpredictable hours. It opens the door for the commodification of whatever will sell - even if that means unconservative consequences like the hyper-sexualisation of advertising. The free market is a grand, global, and systemic idea. Conservatism is traditionally particular, local and social. In short, modern conservative politics came to be built on a contradiction: a pact between the opposing forces of free market liberalism and social conservatism.For a time, that contradiction has been obscured. Good economic conditions certainly helped. But now the pact is beginning to fray. The world is different now. The financial crisis has left once dominant capitalist economies gasping, while the inevitable rise of Asia looms large in our imaginations. We're entering a new phase in which the Western world is no longer globalisation's biggest winner.Bob Katter's constituency have long been globalisation's losers. That's why he frets so much about Australia being a net importer of food. He's not joking when he talks about farmers committing suicide as their farms became uncompetitive. But now more people are likely to have a sense of what he's talking about - and he might just do some damage in Queensland this September.Katter and UKIP are, in some muddled way, attempting to capture what conservative politics lost when it got radically liberal: an abiding concern for the local, and privileging of the local, and a rejection of political programs that bring huge structural change. They're highlighting the contradiction of modern conservatism; it is a contradiction Tony Abbott will confront when he tries to introduce a parental leave scheme that is as conservative as it is opposed to the free market ideology of his party.There's a vulnerability here, and it's not going anywhere. That's what makes this week's budget so interesting. It's not just introducing a new tax. It's trying to reset the basic relationship of government and citizen. Government will build lots of infrastructure, and pump massive funds into education and disability services. Citizens will, frankly, pay for it. Hence, no more handouts and tighter tax schemes. The philosophical intent is clear.As a result there are questions for the Coalition to answer. And Labor's asking the questions it hasn't really asked before. What is Abbott prepared to sacrifice on the altar of a surplus? Education? Disability? Infrastructure? What will he cut in order to re-establish the baby bonus? Which government services matter less than these payments?How Abbott answers these questions threatens to drive him straight into a conflict between the same contradictory forces UKIP and Katter exploit. It's market liberalism against the more socially minded approach that conservatism is currently neglecting. It's all too late for September, of course. But it might just matter beyond then. Waleed Aly is an Age columnist, a host of Drive on Radio National and a lecturer in politics at Monash University. "], ["Lights, camera, China: dollar sinos in the eyes", "May 3, 2013", "92", " Turns out Robert Downey jnr is a Sinophile. ''I live a very Chinese life in America,'' he recently declared. I don't know what that means, either. But I'm pretty sure it has a lot to do with money. He was speaking at the international promotional launch of Iron Man 3, which took place not in Los Angeles, New York or London but in Beijing. Behind the gates of the Forbidden City, no less.None of this happened by accident. When Iron Man 3 hits Chinese cinemas today, audiences will be seeing a special edit of the film made just for them. It will feature extra sequences shot in China and expanded roles for a couple of Chinese film stars. It will have lucrative product placement from the Chinese tech giant TCL. Indeed, the entire film is a collaboration between Disney and the Chinese production studio, DMG Entertainment.The film market reflects the geopolitics of our age. America will not much longer be an unrivalled superpower, and China's rise is unstoppable. ''There's always been a number two,'' explained DMG CEO Dan Mintz. ''But this is the first time anyone is challenging for number one.'' It will win that challenge by 2020. The quest for the Chinese dollar is on. And it has been ever since James Cameron grossed 222 million of them with Avatar.But that means playing by Chinese rules. In Iron Man 3's case, Chinese government officials were on set to ''monitor filming''. And several other films have shown similar, um, sensitivity. Ugly depictions of the sex trade in Macau (a Chinese territory) were reportedly dumped from Skyfall, as was a scene in which a Chinese security guard is assassinated. The apocalyptic zombies in World War Z were the result of a Chinese SARS-like virus, until Paramount thought better of it and made the source a Moscow flu, first spotted - of course - by a Chinese scientist. Then there's the 2012 remake of Red Dawn with an altered plot that has the US invaded not by China, but by North Korea. Or Looper, which depicts a future in which the capital of the world is Beijing, rather than Paris, which was the original plan.I could go on, but the pattern is clear. ''The adjustment of some of our films for different world markets is a commercial reality, and we recognise China's right to determine what content enters their country,'' said a spokesman for the Motion Picture Association of America. That's management-speak for ''we have no choice about this if we want to make money … and we do''.Clearly not everyone is terribly comfortable about all this. A quick scan of the news coverage of Hollywood's Chinese courtship turns up headlines about ''bowing'' and ''kowtowing'' to Chinese sensibilities.Similarly, when Qantas announced recently that, owing to its new partnership with Emirates, pork would not be available on flights going through Dubai, a portion of the Australian population proceeded to lose its mind, threatening to boycott Qantas, condemning it for ''sleeping with the Islamic enemy'' and venting its outrage that ''[our] religion has been disrespected by the removal of pork products'' - because apparently eating pork is now some kind of sacrament. Meanwhile, Qantas' ticket sales to Europe have increased 500 per cent.Welcome to the Asian century. It begins with commerce, but it must inevitably encompass so much more than that. We talk often about how economic power brings with it political and military power. Less frequently do we recognise that it brings extraordinary cultural power, too. So if the age of Western economic domination is coming slowly to an end, so too is the age of Western cultural domination. Hollywood's Chinese dalliance, or Qantas' new menu are merely the seedlings of this inevitable change.It has never been completely true that globalisation is entirely something the West does to the East. But it is certainly true that its impacts are not evenly felt. Some Eastern phenomena do travel west - Bollywood and Gangnam Style being perhaps the cheesiest examples - but for sheer cultural hegemony, nothing really competes with the Western world. It is a rare country that escaped all Americanisation of its culture during the 20th century.But the worm of globalisation is turning. Those screeching at pork-free Qantas flights have probably never given any thought to the fact that almost every Middle Eastern airline - including Emirates - serves alcohol, subordinating the region's own cultural and religious norms to the desires of paying customers. I doubt we'd ever call that ''kowtowing''.Very few of us will have wondered what it must be like for the developed world to face a steady bombardment of Western sitcoms, action flicks and romantic comedies that, at least until now, were made without a second thought for their compatibility with the cultural values of those societies. What must it mean to an Asian musician to know that the only path to global stardom is through Western music alone, and that even then the chances are far slimmer than for their American counterparts? We've probably never considered what impact it must have on dark-skinned women around the world to see the fashion centres of Europe producing globally famous, overwhelmingly white supermodels, which must surely reinforce notions of beauty they can never attain without buying some whitening cream or other. (Which they do. A lot.)These aren't malicious plots. We don't mean for such things to happen; they just do as the inexorable result of power. Indeed, the privilege of cultural supremacy means we don't even need to think about it. But some day that privilege will change hands. We, in the West, with almost no experience of anything other than complete cultural control will have to come to grips with it. Not for a while. Several decades, probably. But it won't be niggle-free. We aren't all Robert Downey jnr. Not all of us can comfortably claim to live very Chinese lives. "], ["Noisy bigots drown out silent bias", "April 4, 2013", "272", " As opening lines in letters go, \"I find you deeply offensive\", is pretty direct. Fair enough. I suspect lots of people do. It's a natural consequence of media work. But then my anonymous correspondent decided to explain why: \"You are foreign, you shall always be so. Piss off back to whatever Middle Eastern sinkhole you blew in here from.\"There's nothing surprising about this. There's nothing even particularly rare about it. Some version of that letter arrives every few months. This one was particularly unvarnished – complete with references to my wife and \"half-caste kids\" and cheerful threats of the return of the White Australia Policy – but the message hardly varies: this isn't my country and my public presence is unwelcome, either because I'm a Muslim, or because in some racially determinable way not a \"real\" Australian. I've been accused of everything from taking elocution lessons to changing the spelling of my name to appear deceptively Australian before I unleash some Trojan conspiracy. Apparently, Aly is roughly equivalent to Smith. They're onto me.I have almost no emotional reaction to this kind of goonish racism. It's simply too ridiculous to engage me. In fact, I'd completely forgotten about this most recent letter until racist ranting hit the headlines this week following yet another racist diatribe on a Sydney bus that was captured and posted to YouTube. It's at least the third such case in about four months. Hence the fresh round of debate on Australian racism that always seems to follow the same unedifying pattern.First comes the shock, as though such incidents reveal something we never knew existed. Then comes the argument over whether or not Australia is a racist country. Frankly, I don't know what the argument means. Every country has racism. How much do you need before a country itself is racist? Is it a matter of essence or degree? Do we judge it by surveying legislation, newspapers or behaviour on public transport? And even if we can answer those questions, then what?That argument is a dead end. It's more about a condemnatory label than the substance and nature of Australian racism. The real question is not about which adjective describes us. It's about how best to identify and respond to the racism we inevitably harbour.Debating the meaning of the occasional racist tirade does not help answer that. It's just not that helpful to take extreme individual behaviour as the starting point on an issue like this. Sure, it's troubling. Sure, it's more common than we like to admit. Sure, it's a problem. But it's not the problem. The racism that really matters in Australia isn't the high-level, weapons-grade derangement that winds its way via YouTube into the news.The truth is we can't compete with Europe for hardcore white nationalism or the US for white supremacist movements. We can't compete with Asia or the Middle East for the maintenance of an explicit, institutionalised and sometimes codified racial hierarchy. Our racial and religious minorities are not having their communities torched (though the occasional building has been firebombed), and our handful of far-right politicians aren't leading political parties that attract 20 per cent of the vote.No, our real problem is the subterranean racism that goes largely unremarked upon and that we seem unable even to detect. Like the racism revealed by an Australian National University study, which found you are significantly less likely to get a job interview if you have a non-European name. The researchers sent fake CVs in response to job advertisements, changing only the name of the applicant. It turns out that if your surname is Chinese, you have to apply for 68 per cent more jobs to get the same number of interviews as an Anglo-Australian. If you are Middle Eastern, it's 64 per cent. If you are indigenous, 35 per cent.This is the polite racism of the educated middle class. It's not as shocking as the viral racist tirades we've seen lately. No doubt the human resources managers behind these statistics would be genuinely appalled by such acts of brazen, overt racism. Indeed, they probably enforce racial discrimination rules in their workplace and are proud to do so. Nonetheless, theirs is surely a more devastating, enduring racism. There is no event to film, just the daily, invisible operation of a silent, pervasive prejudice. It does not get called out. It's just the way things are; a structure of society.That is what bothers me about all the fuss that surrounds these occasional racist diatribes. It puts the focus overwhelmingly on the most exceptional kinds of racist behaviour. But are we capable of recognising racism when it isn't gobsmackingly obvious? Recall, for example, the widespread failure to understand why former Telstra boss Sol Trujillo felt racially offended at being caricatured relentlessly as a sleepy, sombrero-wearing Mexican on a donkey, or described as a \"Mexican bandit\". Certainly, criticise his management of Telstra but can we really not see the gratuitous racial stereotyping? And Trujillo is not even Mexican.Or note the strange Australian comfort with adopting blackface. Remember when Qantas gave two Wallabies fans free tickets because they promised to dress as Radike Samo by blacking up and donning Afro wigs? No offence meant. Qantas apologised. But that's the thing about racism: it goes beyond intentions. The most insidious kind is just so ingrained it's involuntary. It's not about what Qantas intended. It's that no one responsible for the decision even saw the existence of the problem. That sort of thing worries me much more than some crude, anonymous hate mail.It's easy to point at the barking racists on the bus precisely because they aren't us. They allow us to exonerate ourselves; to declare that if we have a problem with racism, at least people like us are not responsible for it. It allows us to escape self-examination of the racism we all probably harbour to some extent or other. That self-examination is crucial. Without it we have nothing to fix, and only other people to blame. "], ["Public loses out as self-interest rules", "March 22, 2013", "32", " What happens to media reform now? The government, having declared the importance and urgency of its reform package, has promptly dumped it in an admission of defeat. It's a story of such political mishandling that it almost rolled a sitting prime minister. But it's also the story of a diabolical problem that might now never be solved in this country.A good starting point is to note the story that in so many ways set this issue alight - that Britain's News of the World had hacked into a murdered schoolgirl's phone and deleted voicemail messages - was incorrect.The hacking happened but the most outrageous part of the story didn't: the messages were probably deleted automatically. Five months after The Guardian broke the original story, it published a colossal correction and consequential corrections to 37 stories.By then the damage was done. The Leveson inquiry was well under way. News of the World had been shut down after 168 years. The schoolgirl's family had already been offered £2 million ($2.9 million). Former editor Rebekah Brooks resigned as chief executive of News International. A suite of reporters and editors (Brooks included) were arrested.It's a richly ironic study in media accuracy, power and accountability. This untrue report blew the lid off a much greater truth: that illegal phone hacking was rampant in News Corporation's British tabloids. It triggered Britain's grandest interrogation of media standards, yet the report would surely have breached those standards. Moreover, it shows just how much irreversible damage an inaccurate media report can do.It therefore symbolises the importance of a free media at the same time as it provides a powerful case for media regulation.And so, this week, Britain reached its political conclusion, with the three main parties agreeing on a tough new regulatory regime. It creates an independent regulator with the power to impose fines of up to £1 million. The scheme is voluntary but media organisations that don't sign up will have to pay greater compensation to any victims who successfully sue them than those who do. Media organisations are predictably upset.Several publications, including The Daily Telegraph in London and The Spectator, are threatening to boycott the regime.This neatly captures the paradox at the heart of media regulation. Repeated serious breaches of journalistic standards mean we cannot trust media with the power they have and yet we can't trust anyone with the power to hold them seriously accountable, either. Both the media and the political class have their own interests. And yet the one interest that counts - the public interest - goes unrepresented.The result is a vacuum that allows each protagonist to pretend their interest is really the public's. In the case of politicians, the suspicion we should have of their motives is obvious. But the media's argument is no less self-serving. By framing the entire issue as one of free speech, the media positions itself as the defender of an inviolable principle. But you won't hear media companies discuss how their commercial interests might compromise free speech as a matter of routine.So let's think this through from first principles. Free speech is fundamental to democracy because it allows competing views to be tested against each other in what is frequently called the ''marketplace of ideas''. This helps citizens understand the pros and cons of the ideas on which they will ultimately vote.But that's not merely an argument for press freedom. It's also an argument for press responsibility. After all, the free market analogy only works if you import the assumptions on which the free market is based - chief among them that consumers have access to perfect information in making their choices. That's the media's role. Unfortunately, we in the media are in no position to claim we fulfil it. Not while fabricating stories that Australia's leading male television presenters are ''united'' in their ''concerns about the government's controversial media reforms'' when this is brazenly false. That's just flat out market distortion.And, right now, it happens pretty much without consequence beyond the odd apology. Even the argument that media outlets will be punished for such conduct by disgruntled customers doesn't remedy the situation. Australia's media ownership is so narrow, and competition so scarce, that there's little scope for the market to uphold standards.So what is the mechanism for accountability?This is the crux of the issue. Media self-regulation fails not because it produces lax codes of conduct, or because those codes aren't applied. It fails because it doesn't matter if they are. The Press Council, for instance, has no power to order fines or compensation. It can't even order something as pedestrian as an apology or correction. It can merely call for one. It is therefore subordinate to its members, who can even hold it to ransom by threatening to withdraw funding.All this combines to make media among the most unaccountable industries we have. The only breaches to be met with force are those serious enough to involve the courts. See Britain.Perhaps this week's entanglement over the government's public interest media advocate might have been avoided. A potent Press Council, with the power to impose real penalties, might just have been effective enough. Sure, that leaves questions about penalties. But those questions are surely easier to resolve than the paradox of a political class setting the rules that govern its adversary. "], ["Without reforms, who will leash the media?", "March 22, 2013", "21", " What happens to media reform now? The government, having declared the urgency of its reform package, has promptly dumped it in an admission of defeat. It's a story of such political mishandling that it undermined a sitting prime minister. But it's also the story of a diabolical policy problem that might now never be solved in this country. Given the potency of the issue, it is worth considering why it's so thorny.A good starting point is to note that the story that set this issue alight - that Britain's News of the World had hacked into a murdered schoolgirl's phone and deleted voicemail messages, giving her friends and family false hope she was alive - was incorrect. The hacking happened, but the most outrageous part of the story didn't: the messages were probably deleted automatically. Five months after The Guardian broke the original story, it published a colossal correction notice.And yet, by then the damage was done. The Leveson inquiry was well under way. News of the World had been shut down after 168 years. The schoolgirl's family had been offered £2 million in compensation. Former editor Rebekah Brooks quit as chief executive of News International. And a process of serial embarrassment of politicians, executives and police, fuelled by public outrage, had such momentum that no correction could have stopped it.It's a richly ironic study in media accuracy, power and accountability. This incorrect report blew the lid off a much greater truth: that illegal phone hacking was rampant in News Corporation's British tabloids. It triggered Britain's grandest interrogation of media standards, yet the report would surely have breached those standards itself. Moreover, it shows just how much irreversible damage an inaccurate media report can do. It therefore symbolises the fundamental importance of a free media at the same time as it provides a powerful case for media regulation.This week, Britain reached its political conclusion. The three major parties agree on a tough new regime, creating an independent regulator with the power to impose fines of up to £1 million. The scheme is voluntary, but media organisations that don't sign up will have to pay greater compensation to any victims who successfully sue them than those who do. Media organisations are predictably upset, decrying this as political interference in journalism. The press holds politicians to account, but not, apparently, the other way around. Several publications, including The Daily Telegraph and The Spectator are threatening to boycott the regime.This neatly captures the paradox at the heart of media regulation. Repeated, serious breaches of journalistic standards mean we cannot trust media with the awesome power they have, and yet we can't trust anyone with the power to hold them seriously accountable, either. Everyone is conflicted here. Both the media and the political class have their own interests in this game. And yet the one interest that counts - the public interest - goes unrepresented.The result is a vacuum that allows each protagonist to pretend their own self-interest is really the public's. In the case of politicians, the conflict of interest, and the suspicion we should have of their motives, is obvious. But the media's argument is no less self-serving. By framing the entire issue as one of free speech, the media positions itself as the defender of an inviolable principle. But you won't hear media companies discuss how their commercial interests might compromise free speech as a matter of routine. We'll never know, for instance, how many bad news stories about a major sponsor have been buried. Whose interests does that serve?So let's think this through from first principles. Free speech is fundamental to democracy because it allows competing views to be tested against each other in the ''marketplace of ideas''. This helps citizens understand the pros and cons of the ideas on which they will ultimately vote. But that's not merely an argument for press freedom. It's also an argument for press responsibility. After all, the free market analogy only works if you import the assumptions on which the free market is based - chief among them that consumers have access to perfect information in making their choices.That's the media's role. Unfortunately, we in the media are in no position to claim we fulfil it. Not while fabricating stories that Australia's leading male television presenters are ''united'' in their ''concerns about the government's controversial media reforms''. That's flat out market distortion. It's the media equivalent of misleading and deceptive conduct.And right now, it happens pretty much without consequence beyond the odd apology. Even the argument that media outlets will be punished for such conduct by disgruntled customers doesn't remedy the situation. Australia's media ownership is so narrow, and competition so scarce, that there's little scope for the market to uphold standards. And in any event, there's little evidence to suggest trust equals audience size. So, what exactly is the mechanism for accountability?This, it seems to me, is the crux of the issue. Media self-regulation fails, not because it produces lax codes of conduct, or because those codes aren't applied. It fails because it doesn't matter if they are. The Press Council, for instance, has no power to order fines or compensation. In fact, it can't order anything - even something as pedestrian as an apology or correction. It can merely call for one. It is therefore subordinate to its members, who can choose to ignore it, or even hold it to ransom by threatening to withdraw funding. Often its members play nicely, but sometimes they don't. Fancy being able to opt out when you don't like the umpire's decision. All this combines to make media among the most unaccountable industries we have. The only breaches to be met with force are those serious enough to involve the courts. See Britain.Perhaps, then, this week's ultimately fatal entanglement over the government's Public Interest Media Advocate might have been avoided. A potent Press Council, with the power to impose real penalties, might just have been effective enough. Sure, that leaves open lots of questions about which penalties should apply when. But those questions are surely easier to resolve than the paradox of a political class setting the rules that govern its adversary.Age columnist Waleed Aly lectures in politics at Monash University. "], ["Ray Rice case the tip of an ugly NFL iceberg", "September 19, 2014", "0", " The Californian newspaper U-T San Diego has compiled an NFL Arrests Database.  It only goes back to 2000, but comprises 727 entries.  It's serious stuff, too: assaulting police officers, violent child abuse, felony domestic violence and  drug possession.  And that's just in the past six weeks. Ray Rice, incidentally, isn't one of these.  He's just the one you've heard about since TMZ released the sickening video of him brutally knocking his then fiance unconscious in an elevator, then dragging her limp body out of view.  That incident is from February – entry No. 32.  Now think about that: 31 players have been arrested since then. Now, the NFL's cover is blown: the rampant, frequently criminal violence of its players; the protection racket that surrounds the most talented stars; the culture of denial that sees someone like Rice pitifully suspended for only two matches until the full video becomes public and shames the sport into action.  And it's far from an isolated case.  To get a sense of how manifestly absurd it gets, consider that in covering the Ray Rice disaster, ESPN relied on an ex-teammate and mentor named Ray Lewis. He  is a suspect in a double homicide and has admitted to hindering the investigation. But for all that, the NFL is far and away the dominant American sport. It might even be the dominant American thing.  It rates like nothing else on US television, setting new audience records year after year.  It's a multi-billion dollar business: the Dallas Cowboys are worth more than  $3 billion alone.  Can sport really be that indestructible?  Can we be so helplessly intoxicated by it that even when a  number of its stars are felons, we simply shrug and move on?  To date, the answer is yes.  The very magic of sport is that it manages, somehow, to persuade us that it is anything more than utterly trivial.  This, quite clearly, is a product of its unadulterated escapism.  Sport is a parallel world that offers all the things the rest of life doesn't: sharply defined social groupings, delineated by unambiguous tribal colouring; an indisputable, final result; the promise of a meritocracy.  This is adult make believe; a neatly contained environment in which nothing else matters – especially not anything that really matters. That apparently includes almost any of the players' vices.  More so than any of our public figures, our athletes are not people.  Politicians may strike us as caricatures, pop stars and actors may be doused in layers of fakery, but they all build their success on at least the illusion of being human.  Singers bare their soul by singing about their latest heartbreak; the actor draws on emotions we all understand in order to make us relate to their character; the politician searches endlessly for a common touch that places them among us (perhaps by feigning an interest in sport).  The trick is to make us think we know them as people, even as we don't.  But the athlete?  There is simply no such requirement.  The athlete is defined by the colour of their guernsey, their deeds on the field and little else.  So we boo them instantly the moment those colours change. Sport is an utterly self-referential world.  Extrinsic facts are of limited value.  Only intrinsic scandals are truly scandalous.  So we barely discuss that, for example, two AFL players (one recently retired) are presently facing rape charges.  We are far more likely to be rocked by allegations of systematic doping, or match fixing.  None of this is as serious as rape in any serious worldview.  But sport is precisely about the suspension of a serious worldview.  A player's alleged rape seems to belong to a separate world we can quarantine and leave in the hands of the justice system.  But a player's use of performance enhancing drugs violates this world and for that reason becomes intolerable.  So, for all the well-established thuggery of so many NFL stars, it has never lost its grip on the American imagination in the way baseball did in the '90s. First the players went on strike and then found themselves embroiled in a drugs scandal. Here's hoping Rice's misogynist brutality is enough to make worlds collide.  Here's hoping it will finally be perhaps the first extrinsic scandal that is so heinous, so suffocating, that it becomes an intrinsic, inseparable part of the way we talk about the game.  Only this can force the NFL to understand the severity of its failings and force sport more generally, to understand its moral obligations.  Sport may be escapism, but it has an extraordinary power to teach and to lead society, to bring together people who would otherwise never interact.  To do this, though, it must understand the expectations of the society it's in.  If sport is to be our uncritically loved parallel world, it must prove itself worthy of the privilege.  Right now, the NFL isn't. "], ["Ukraine the latest pawn in an imperial game", "March 21, 2014", "0", " Seems the good people of Sevastopol really want to be Russian. All 123 per cent of them turned out to vote in this week's referendum to say so. They're a fickle bunch, though.If they're anything like their fellow Crimeans, only about a third of them felt this way in 2011, and only a quarter still did in 2013. This week it's in the vicinity of 97 per cent. That's some turnaround, even if you allow for the fact that there was a mass boycott from anti-Russian residents, or that people armed with only a Russian passport were allowed to vote.So Crimea is now part of Russia - at least if you ask Vladimir Putin who cheerfully annexed the peninsula in response. The West, of course, is apoplectic, branding all this illegal and imposing sanctions on Russia. And indeed, on one reading, this is uniquely egregious.Not since World War II has anyone in Europe simply taken territory from a sovereign country. Russia has its pretexts - chief among them that the ethnic Russian population in Ukraine is facing persecution - but none of them lead legitimately to swallowing another nation's land. Especially not after a dodgy referendum that gave voters a choice only between joining Russia and effective autonomy. If you wanted to vote to remain part of Ukraine, subordinate to Kiev, you simply had no box to tick.The hypocrisy here is profound. When Kosovo held a referendum in 2008 to declare its independence from Serbia, the apoplexy was all Russia's. It didn't matter that this followed nine years of negotiations, during which time Kosovo was under international supervision.It didn't matter that the Kosovar people had endured dozens of massacres at Serbian hands as part of a dedicated ethnic cleansing campaign - a level of persecution that renders any comparison with the experience of Russian-speakers in Ukraine simply ridiculous.Russia screamed this violated Serbia's territorial integrity and that the United Nations was therefore obliged to declare the referendum void and impose ''severe administrative measures'' against Kosovar institutions. It's the same story Russia always tells, no matter how wretched the circumstances (see Syria).In the Russian view, a nation should be free to persecute as many of its own people as it pleases without having to deal with foreign interference.Sovereignty trumps all.Listen closely to Putin's words back in 2008: ''The precedent of Kosovo is a terrible precedent, which will de facto blow apart the whole system of international relations, developed not over decades, but over centuries.'' Heavy stuff.Now it seems it's a precedent he's only too happy to follow, with interest. Putin's rhetoric must therefore return to condemn him: he is not merely undermining Ukraine, or Western interests; he's undermining the entire international system. Any way you cut it, Putin is adopting a decidedly imperial pose.All of which would be scandalous if it weren't so common. The most tin-eared, self-unaware comment of this episode must still surely be US Secretary of State John Kerry's insistence that ''you just don't in the 21st century behave in 19th-century fashion by invading another country on completely trumped-up pretext''.Of course, this is perhaps the most eloquent description of America's 21st-century invasion of Iraq that anyone has yet offered. Certainly, Iraq and Crimea are not identical. The biggest difference (aside from the hundreds of thousands of Iraqi civilian deaths) is that America was never going to annex Iraq. That is no longer America's style.But it would be naive to stop there; to accept at face value the suggestion that America therefore has no imperial impulses and operates as a modest nation-state, concerned merely with the administration of its own territory. The age of empire may formally have passed, but that just means today's empires take a different form.Now they expand interests and project power through non-military means. They prop up compliant, unpopular, frequently dictatorial allies through copious aid. Elsewhere they fund civil society groups that non-allied governments regard as hostile. They build military and economic alliances with countries they feel a strategic need to have on their side.Ukraine is precisely such a country. Indeed, so are several of the former-Soviet states that sit between Russia and Europe.This is why America has been so keen to bring them into NATO, thereby forging a military pact with them - the kind that was mobilised to pound Serbia in 1999.Russia fears the same thing could happen to it if NATO incorporates too many countries that sit on its borders. Russia openly regards this as an existential threat.So far NATO has coaxed Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania. In time it hoped to add Georgia and Ukraine, thereby surrounding Russia. There's nothing random about America's designs here. And there's nothing random about Russia's determination to stop it, and expand its own alliances in Eurasia. This is an imperial game.''I prefer Russia,'' says Sean Connery's character in The Russia House. ''It's as corrupt as America, but there's less bullshit.'' That's about the size of it.When circumstances demand it, neither power cares much for the niceties of international law, and neither is meaningfully bound by it. Both aim to project their power as far as possible. But America's form of empire building is generally sophisticated enough to retain the veneer of normal international relations. Russia just goes ahead and annexes stuff. "], ["Coalition finds ideology, but does it have a vision?", "March 7, 2014", "0", " We're beginning to run a touch low on icons. With Holden's demise now official, the focus has this week shifted to Qantas, which is so comprehensively stuffed that its strategy is to approach the government for an unsecured loan of $3 billion.That, of course, was fanciful. Just how fanciful becomes clear when you consider that the Abbott government has now ruled out even providing a debt guarantee, which at least in the short term involves handing no money over at all. In fact, the government's only plan for Qantas seems to be to propose legislation it has no hope of passing, which would allow it to seek greater foreign investment.''No Plan B'' screams the opposition. True enough, I suppose. But let us not be lured into thinking this points to a government with no ideas and no imagination. This absence of a plan here is something studied and deliberate. The Abbott government has a plan to have no plan, and it's really committed to it.That's the whole point of neo-liberalism. It sees the world as a market and solves every problem through it. In this scheme, governments exist to keep the market running, not to develop elaborate plans for companies or industries. Thus the Abbott government's response to the Qantas disaster is an entirely predictable one for a neo-liberal government to offer: remove as many market distortions as possible, then do nothing else.To be sure, the government hasn't been pristine on this. Just last week it gave money and access to favourable loans to drought-stricken farmers. Last year it blocked foreign investment in GrainCorp. And of course there was the now infamous grant it pledged to Cadbury before the election. Indeed there are still plenty of small business grants being given.But politics is always compromised to some degree, and the political imperatives in such cases are typically clear, focused as they are on winning marginal seats or placating the National Party. It's on the big cases that the government has been determined to make a statement.So with Qantas as with Holden, Toyota and SPC Ardmona, the government is doing more than making policy decisions. It is articulating a philosophy. Plenty of people hate it, but that only proves that it's unmistakable.Ideas, it seems, are back in Australian politics. In just six months in office, the Abbott government has discovered a level of philosophical clarity Labor couldn't manage in six years.This is a remarkable thing for a Coalition whose approach to opposition had almost nothing to do with ideology. Abbott's promiscuous opportunism delivered his party government, but also the fear that his would be a government with no direction. So much for that.The problem is that we don't really know where this road ends. The almost total absence of ideological contest in the past two elections has meant that we've never really debated this. At no point has the Coalition had to explain what its Australia would look like in, say, 30 years. What do we think our economy will look like, for instance?As so many traditional jobs and iconic companies pass into history, you might think it an urgent question. But the Coalition feels no need to answer it because neo-liberalism asks us to trust that the market will simply produce more efficient replacement jobs. No plan, remember? That's the plan.It's a lot of trust to place in a theory. And even if it works, it means a great deal of pain along the way for a great many people. This is what Labor is most keen to exploit. But even so, it has hardly unleashed the kind of withering attack that leaves the nation's ears ringing. A government surrounded by enough bad news to have it in serious trouble still has its head above water.That's because the government has managed to weave much of this bad news into a story. Its decisions are comprehensible, even if you instinctively detest them; coherent, even if galling. This is more or less the opposite of what Labor achieved in government, where, for example, it neglected its story on climate change to such an extent that by the time the carbon tax arrived it was discussed almost entirely in economic terms, and viewed through the prism of political dishonesty.The result is that Labor can't so easily adopt the Abbott approach to opposition, which was to throw whichever punches were in reach, create a sense of chaos and declare the government illegitimate. Abbott could do that because Labor's narrative was never particularly clear, so it didn't need a more comprehensive or consistent riposte.By contrast, this government's stand against corporate support is easily grasped, and stands as a broad guiding principle. Labor needs a counter-narrative of its own that the Coalition can't just dismiss as propping up failing businesses, but it's far from clear what that is.This reflects what is perhaps the biggest difference between the way the major parties do politics. Labor in power attempts to prove itself on the Coalition's terms (hence the obsessive and ultimately futile quest for a surplus). The Coalition simply pays no heed to Labor. That's what happens when only one side has clear ideological zeal. And so we have ideas in politics again. What we lack is an ideological contest. "], ["The real reason behind Tony Abbott's industrial relations war", "February 7, 2014", "0", " Liberal backbencher Sharman Stone is the most effective opposition leader in the country. She's across her brief, argues her case powerfully and directly, and carries with her an undeniable sincerity that spectacularly subordinates her prospects of career advancement to the interests of her constituents.But perhaps most profoundly, she has managed in the space of a week to surround the Abbott government with a series of intractable questions that drive at the heart of exactly what this hitherto opaque government is really trying to achieve. Stone is making the government transparent.To be clear, she almost certainly does not intend anything so grand. Her aim is simply to reverse her colleagues' decision to deny SPC Ardmona the $25 million it apparently needs to keep operating. But when you accuse your own boss of \"lying\" and \"hypocrisy\", and when you lay bare the political imperatives of making election promises to marginal seats that contradict the decisions you make in safe ones, you inevitably open a vein. This is no longer just about whether or not the government's decision was justified. It's about why the government has chosen to present this issue the way it has.Why did the Prime Minister so grossly misrepresent SPC's enterprise bargaining agreement, and the costs it imposes on the company?The government had several coherent (even if contestable) reasons for its decision: SPC sits within a highly profitable company flushed with cash to invest unlike our debt-riddled government; that to give money in these circumstances would set an appalling precedent of corporate welfare, inviting profitable businesses to queue for handouts; that this government is philosophically driven by the principle that it is for businesses to stand or fall on their own.Fleetingly, the government mentioned these. Since the storm of protest it has fallen back on them.But for what Tony Abbott has described as a \"defining decision\" of this government - one that underlined its firm philosophical commitment to non-intervention in the market and the end of corporate welfare - it has now significantly muddied its own waters.There was scant justification for placing industrial relations at the centre of this story. Ask SPC why it's struggling and you get a very clear answer that emphatically has nothing to do with industrial relations. Employees' allowances, they've now informed us, cost them $116,467 last year. Next to the $25 million they're after, that's piddling.In that context there was simply no need for the Prime Minister to give the company, which he had just finished telling us was so well run, public advice on how bad its industrial arrangements are.SPC knows its industrial arrangements - considerably better than the government, it turns out. No, the government's performance here was for the electorate.In this respect, the SPC decision is really chapter two.Chapter one came last week when Employment Minister Eric Abetz warned that Australia risked \"something akin to a wages explosion of the pre-accord era when unsustainable wage growth simply pushed thousands of Australians out of work\".As it happens, actual wage growth is the lowest we've ever seen, but Abetz wasn't talking about money. He was taking aim at conditions: too much leave and the like, which makes businesses less profitable.Abetz's evidence was thin, which is probably why economists broadly dismissed his claims. He drew on a few examples from the car manufacturing industry and the resources industry, which represent the extreme ends of our two-speed economy and not an economy-wide trend of over-generosity. But that is the portrait of our economy the government is urging on us: one where it is workers' conditions negotiated collectively with employers that cost jobs, and not the bigger underlying economic conditions like the strength of our currency or our exposure to a global marketplace that often reciprocates with more protectionist measures than we afford ourselves.The SPC case therefore had to be bent into shape to fit this narrative. That's why the government emphasised things such as the EBA's \"wet allowance\", which means almost nothing to anyone, and for that precise reason sounds idiosyncratic and decadently, unjustifiably generous.\"Wet allowance? I don't have a wet allowance. No one has a wet allowance! Must be a rort!\" thought the public. Or at least it did until it became clear that this allowance covers the costs of protective gear for people whose job brings them into contact with dangerous chemicals, and that SPC no longer pays it anyway, preferring instead to buy the gear for the workers itself.Significantly, this narrative isn't simply one of union bashing. Listen to Abbott and Abetz and you'll note the companies are getting bashed as well. They're the ones Abetz described as \"weak-kneed\", and which Abbott has urged to get their \"house in order\". What's happening here is a transference of responsibility: a declaration that our industrial relations are in total disrepair, but that it's not for the government to do anything about it.This, I suspect, is the Abbott government's way of establishing an industrial relations conversation, without having a policy debate on the issue. Abbott knows any discussion of policy will be politically catastrophic. He also faces enormous pressure from within his own movement to take back the territory the Coalition surrendered with John Howard's defeat.The solution seems to be to make it an issue independent of government; to illustrate slowly over time that the system is broken so that reform becomes possible.It's as though Abbott is trying to drag himself kicking and screaming towards a policy. But to do that his illustrations need to have punch. And all that is lost when your illustrations turn out to be caricatures. "], ["Unravelling the Turkish enigma", "January 24, 2014", "0", " Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan is perhaps the most intriguing, enigmatic world leader of his generation. His legacy will almost certainly be an utterly transformed Turkey, no longer dominated by the military and clearly having shed the aggressive secularism Ataturk so famously set in train nearly a century ago. And yet, no one can say for sure what his agenda is without resorting ultimately to ideologically driven portraits. Never has such an activist politician been so difficult to grasp.Is he an arch-Islamist autocrat, determined to force Islamic mores on unwilling Turks? Or is he an exemplar of Islam's marriage with democracy; a reformer who has established civilian rule, expanded civil rights and handed cultural rights to the oppressed Kurdish minority?The truth is it's a confusing picture. His decade of democratic reforms in a frequently authoritarian nation must stand as a remarkable achievement. But last month he found his government engulfed in a monstrous corruption scandal that has claimed four ministers and resulted in more than 20 arrests. His response has been to attempt a purge of the police force and the judiciary of disloyal elements. This naturally invites strident charges of, among other things, trashing judicial independence.At the intersection of these contradictory images of Erdogan lies one enduring issue: Europe. Erdogan's democratic reforms were delivered as he pushed for Turkey's inclusion in the EU. But those negotiations have been stalled for 3½ years now, and this has roughly coincided with his more autocratic turn.Turkey has begun looking very much like it is facing east. Erdogan's party has suggested several times that it might abandon its EU bid, and instead join the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation dominated by Russia and China. Meanwhile Turkey's stance towards Israel has cooled as its relationship with Iran warms. Senior government members make frequent cultural overtures like the deputy speaker who recently criticised \"pro-West\" practices such as co-education.All of which makes this week utterly fascinating. For the first time in five years, Erdogan finds himself in Brussels. And for the first time in more than three, Turkey is again negotiating with Europe. If you believe that Turkey is more likely to steer in a transparent, democratic direction when it is seeking EU admission than when it is not, these talks are also very important, and offer hope that Turkey's recent authoritarian slide might be arrested.But in so many ways the timing is bizarre and disastrous. Erdogan goes to these talks in a weakened position. Europe is decidedly unimpressed by his judicial purge, for which he remains defiantly unapologetic. Meanwhile, the head of Turkey's business association is now saying the country is in danger of becoming a \"police state\", and perhaps most symbolically, corruption allegations have forced Erdogan to sack his EU minister. When you add the fact that Turkey has lately shown no apparent interest in joining the EU, there's a blindingly obvious question to ask about all this: do these negotiations have any hope at all?It's easy to argue they don't. In fact it's easy to argue they're a charade. The argument runs that Erdogan doesn't really need the EU any more because while European support was helpful in his agenda to establish civilian rule, that battle has now been won. Europe has rejected Turkey when it has had better democratic credentials than it does now, so how could it be remotely well disposed to Turkish accession?If that's right, it's a pity for both sides. Europe, frankly, could use a sizeable and growing economy at the moment. But that growth is now slowing, and this is where Erdogan has much to gain. EU membership would open access to European markets, perhaps giving him the injection he needs.How seriously these talks proceed will tell us much about the parties. Clearly they will help Turks decide whether Europe will ever have any intention of letting them into the club. But they'll also tell us something about how Erdogan sees the world and Turkey's place within it. And in that way, this episode might just help us understand who Erdogan is. "], ["Trying to unravel the enigma of Recep Erdogan", "January 24, 2014", "0", " Turkish Prime Minister, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, is perhaps the most intriguing, enigmatic world leader of his generation.His legacy will almost certainly be an utterly transformed Turkey, no longer dominated by the military and clearly having shed the aggressive secularism Ataturk so famously set in train nearly a century ago. And yet, no one can say for sure what his agenda is without resorting ultimately to ideologically driven portraits.Is he an arch-Islamist autocrat, determined to force Islamic mores on unwilling Turks? Or is he an exemplar of Islam's marriage with democracy; a reformer who has established civilian rule, expanded civil rights and handed cultural rights to the oppressed Kurdish minority?The truth is it's a confusing picture. His decade of democratic reforms in a frequently authoritarian nation must stand as a remarkable achievement. But last month he found his government engulfed in a corruption scandal that has claimed four ministers and resulted in more than 20 arrests. His response has been to try to purge the police force and the judiciary of disloyal elements, citing a plot of foreign infiltration that has corrupted these institutions. This naturally invites strident charges of, among other things, trashing judicial independence.At the intersection of these contradictory images of Erdogan lies one enduring issue: Europe. His democratic reforms were delivered as he pushed for Turkey's inclusion in the EU. But those negotiations have been stalled for 3½ years now, and this has roughly coincided with his more autocratic turn.Meanwhile, Turkey has begun looking very much like it is facing east - as though it had finally decided, after a century of imitating and seeking acceptance from Europe, not to bother any more. Erdogan's party has suggested several times that it might abandon its EU bid, and instead join the Shanghai Co-operation Organisation, dominated by Russia and China. Meanwhile, Turkey's stance towards Israel has cooled as its relationship with Iran is warming. Domestically, senior government members make frequent cultural overtures, like the deputy speaker who recently criticised ''pro-West'' practices such as co-education.All of which makes this week utterly fascinating. For the first time in five years, Erdogan finds himself in Brussels. And for the first time in more than three, Turkey is again negotiating with Europe. If you believe that Turkey is more likely to steer in a transparent, democratic direction when it is seeking EU admission than when it is not, these talks are very important, and offer hope that Turkey's recent authoritarian slide might be arrested.But Erdogan goes to these talks in a weakened position. Europe is decidedly unimpressed by his judicial purge, for which he remains defiantly apologetic. ''It's nobody's job to make a statement about Turkey's move,'' he has said, rejecting any suggestion this contravened EU principles. Meanwhile, the head of Turkey's business association is now saying the country is in danger of becoming a ''police state'', and perhaps most symbolically, corruption allegations have forced Erdogan to sack his EU Minister.When you add the fact Turkey has lately shown no apparent interest in joining the EU, there's a blindingly obvious question: do these negotiations have any hope at all? It's easy to argue they don't. It's easy to argue they're a charade.The argument runs that Erdogan doesn't really need the EU any more because while European support was helpful in his agenda to establish civilian rule, that battle has now been won. Indeed, he might even benefit politically among those who've grown tired of European rejection from being seen to stand up to Europe when it starts making demands about Turkish governance. In this way, the talks allow him to draw further attention to his eastward march.Meanwhile, Europe has resolutely rejected Turkey when it has had better democratic credentials than it does now, so how could it be remotely well disposed to Turkish accession? If that's right, it's a pity for both sides. Despite all the bluster and identity politics that so often pollutes this issue, the fact is each has something to gain here. Europe, frankly, could use a sizeable and growing economy at the moment. But that growth is now slowing, and this is where Erdogan has much to gain.The truth is he's in more trouble than he'll care to admit. Only once has Erdogan gone backwards in an election - in 2009 after the financial crisis. He is more vulnerable than at any time since.EU membership would open access to European markets, perhaps giving him the injection he needs. How seriously these talks proceed will tell us much about the parties. Clearly they will help Turks decide whether Europe will ever have any intention of letting them into the club. But they'll also tell us something about how Erdogan sees the world and Turkey's home in it. And in that way, this episode might just help us understand who Erdogan is. "], ["Divided Lebanon has an identity crisis", "January 10, 2014", "0", " The National Museum of Beirut houses one of the great prehistoric collections in the world. It's here you'll find the earliest example we have of an alphabet in human history. You'll also find astonishing Egyptian-styled sarcophagi topped bizarrely with Graeco-Roman faces; a fusion of artistic traditions that demonstrates just what a cultural meeting point this part of the world has always been.What you won't find is anything post-mediaeval. Modern Lebanon just doesn't exist in its national museum. It can't exist because the cultures that meet there these days could never agree on what story should be told. Indeed, the museum's only modern artefact is the bullet hole from the Lebanese civil war that punctures the bottom-left corner of perhaps its most impressive Byzantine mosaic.So it is in Beirut, and indeed Lebanon as a whole. There are Sunni, Christian and Shiite areas, but there are no national areas. Nation-states typically go to great lengths to convey their propaganda to the public, to articulate a national mythology. But Lebanon doesn't even bother. Beirut has no monuments to independence, founding fathers or national heroes. It doesn't even have the oversized photos of presidents (or prime ministers) that are so compulsory throughout the Middle East.In Lebanon, modern heroes are sectarian, and modern national symbols are tragic and embody unresolved conflict. Like the iconic Holiday Inn, left gutted and burnt from the civil war, sitting hauntingly among a clutch of shiny downtown high-rises. If there's a national identity in Lebanon, it's so heavily obscured by bullet holes that very few of its politicians can see it.''Nations who don't find their national identities are doomed to be the prey of other nations.'' So declared Ataturk in 1923. He was, of course, speaking with post-Ottoman Turkey in mind, but it is hard to imagine a more penetrating description of Lebanon. After decades of watching its politicians play up sectarian divisions and seek support from foreign powers, Lebanon has become not so much a country as a theatre for regional geo-politics.And so the Shiites - now most actively represented by Hezbollah - take their orders from Iran and the Assad regime in Syria, while Sunnis seek support from Saudi Arabia, and embrace Syria's increasingly radical rebels. No group can conceive of its own interests without their foreign patrons: even Lebanon's Christians who have floated back towards Assad as their protector against Sunni radicalism.Just this past week Beirut has seen a former finance minister assassinated and a (Sunni) suicide bomber kill five civilians in a Shiite neighbourhood. And yet neither is a domestic Lebanese matter, because almost nothing is. The assassination is most likely an order from Syria, reasserting Assad's will in Lebanon. The suicide bombing is clear retaliation for Hezbollah's involvement in the Syrian civil war, fighting for the Assad regime. It's an involvement that has merely encouraged the same international terrorist groups fighting Assad to start terrorising Lebanon, thereby exposing Hezbollah's claim to be ''resisting'' foreign aggression on behalf of Lebanon as a sham, and making clear that they are merely providing Lebanese muscle for Iran.Meanwhile, Saudi Arabia is offering $3 billion to strengthen the Lebanese army. Its aim seems obvious enough: to gain influence over the only viable military alternative to Hezbollah in Lebanon. Lebanese Sunnis are likely to welcome it, because they would love a Lebanese army sympathetic to their interests. The Shiites, however, are in a bind. Do they really want a strong Lebanese army, or would they prefer it to remain weak enough for Hezbollah to dominate?It boils down to this: Lebanon is now a contest between the two real powers of the region - Saudi Arabia and Iran. And in this respect, Lebanon is a microcosm; a place that merely distils the real game of Middle Eastern politics.It's visible in the Syrian civil war, which is far less civil than it seems since it has become a proxy confrontation between Iran and Saudi Arabia, which is cheerfully funding rebel groups, hoping desperately for Assad to fall. It's visible in the outraged Saudi reaction to America's nuclear deal with Iran struck last November. It's even visible in Iraq, where Iran has profited handsomely from America's removal of Saddam Hussein and the emergence of a Shiite government, and where the Saudi government stands accused of funding Sunni terrorist groups who have now spectacularly gained control of Fallujah.The Sunni-Shiite divide is now definitive. But it's more manufactured than it first appears: a convenient dividing line the Saudis and Iranians can use to mobilise support. Only recently has this sectarianism become so radioactive. Most deeply these divisions are political. This is an old story of competing nations - here acting as empires - dividing for conquest.And here we return to Ataturk's dictum. This Saudi-Iran havoc is only possible because the Middle East is crammed with countries whose national identities have never truly been resolved; whose borders have been horrifically drawn to capture almost nothing coherent; who shook off colonisation only to discover they didn't quite know who they were in these new, often arbitrary political formations. And sometimes, if you don't know who you are, it's just easier to fight who you're not. "], ["Political change happens at warp speed in age of snap-judgement", "December 27, 2013", "0", " This year we've had three prime ministers, Victoria has had two premiers, the Northern Territory has had two chief ministers - and while we're at it, Catholics have had two popes.In only one case was an election and a change of government involved. It's possible to see this as the assembly of unconnected coincidences, as though this remarkable tally is to be consigned to the annals of trivia, indicative of nothing.It's possible to explain each of these leadership transitions on its own terms: the Gillard/Rudd fiasco - and Abbott's subsequent ascension - as a function of a dysfunctional Labor Party; Ted Baillieu's demise as the failure of a weak leader; Terry Mills as the victim of a diabolical policy decision to raise electricity prices in the Northern Territory. But in 12 months? It's as though time is being compressed.I mark 2013 as the year the consequences of a public and political culture operating at warp speed started to become clear.Already there's evidence the velocity is set to continue. The Abbott government, having barely been in office 100 days, already trails in the polls. It has enjoyed nothing even approximating a honeymoon period and, more than that, has failed even to enjoy a phase of post-election inertia in which the electorate looks elsewhere and just sticks with its decision.In falling behind so quickly, the government has set a new record. And this despite having taken over from a Labor government that even sympathisers would quietly concede was unelectable, despite facing an opposition that has hardly been rampaging.History says it's very unlikely, but it's possible Abbott will be a one-term prime minister. Like Gillard. And Rudd. Maybe it's too early to say a cross-partisan pattern is emerging in Australian politics, but it's certainly not too early to ask.There are lots of explanations for the Abbott government's early slide. It botched education policy. Its attempt to trim its media profile runs the risk of looking evasive, particularly on its signature policy area of immigration. The relationship with Indonesia has taken a beating on its watch, even if the spying activity that has so enraged the Indonesians came from Labor's time in office.Coalition MPs have been caught spending taxpayers' money in dubious circumstances. And, perhaps most importantly, Australia never heartily embraced Abbott's Coalition. That much was evident the morning after the election, when it became clear that most of the swing away from Labor and the Greens went to novelty parties, with the Coalition picking up less than a quarter of it.If it's true the electorate never really warmed to Abbott, it's because his style in opposition was so aggressive that there was little warmth to go around. But it's also true that this is exactly the reason he's now PM. It was a stunningly successful method that had Labor on the ropes for almost an entire electoral term. His critics will say he bludgeoned the electorate with simplistic sloganeering, and that the noise made life impossible for a government running a complex series of arguments. Maybe. But why did it work?I think it's because Abbott's approach was so perfectly suited to the age.Much has been written about the 24-hour news cycle and the culture of sound-bite politics it generates. All that is true. But the problem is much bigger than that. It's society-wide.Our entire mode of living is now built on speed. We communicate instantly and constantly, and we command an impressive array of gadgets to facilitate this. The moment we receive news, we're reacting to it, usually with virtual people whose role - either as ideological friend or foe - is predetermined.A political development is not as important as the immediate argument we intend to prosecute with it. We've arranged ourselves into teams, and we take our cues from our teammates. We're becoming captive to a kind of digital tribalism.This is a whole new sociology, and it brings with it a whole new politics of obstinate snap-judgment. Put simply, we commit too hard, too early. That's why political parties take the huge step of replacing leaders so much faster than they used to. They know we're not really for turning any more. And that's because, while we're smothered with information, we simply don't have time to digest it. But since we all have megaphones now, it's unthinkable to be silent; to have nothing to say. So we make noise. And, in the process, what we're losing as a society is the capacity for reflection.That is a social environment fundamentally suited to the task of opposition. Abbott seemed to know that instinctively. He didn't ask us to judge, rather than reflect. And he set up rapidly digestible templates to help us make those snap judgments. Templates that would undermine any government such as: unpredictability and crises in government are a result of incompetence. Hence ''no surprises, no excuses''. Thus did he vanquish two prime ministers.Now, as his government faces its own surprises, and necessarily must find the odd excuse, it fails its own tests from opposition. Sure, every government is wobbly early, and there's every chance this one will find its feet and recover. But if it doesn't, it could be that Tony Abbott is his own third scalp. In a sense, he's running against himself. More profoundly, he's running against the times. "], ["Death of car industry 30 years in the making", "December 13, 2013", "0", " In the short term, there's no consistency in politics. Back when the Gillard government announced the carbon tax, it took approximately six seconds for the Coalition to scream that this would cost jobs and devastate entire towns. Bollocks, retorted Labor, occasionally by way of karaoke. Sure, some industries would be hit, but they're the kind of industries the environment needs us to scale back. Meanwhile, we'll create shiny, new, eco-friendly jobs. People will retrain, and find new opportunities. The workforce is adaptable and dynamic.Now, without anybody really noticing, Labor and the Coalition seem to have swapped positions. As Labor inspects the carcass of the Australian car industry, it foreshadows monstrous job losses, the devastation of manufacturing towns in South Australia and Victoria, and protests that you can't simply ask people who have spent their lives assembling cars suddenly to work in nursing homes. And the Coalition is suddenly brimming with confidence that these things are always transient, evolving and ultimately leave us stronger. ''No Whyalla wipeout'' sings Abbott. Oh, wait.But in the long run, things are far more consistent than all that. The truth is that the death of Australian car manufacturing did not begin on September 7. It began 30 years ago when the Hawke government commenced the job of abolishing tariffs, opening us to global competition. This was declared a necessary step in Australia's economic evolution. It would bring growth, dynamism, and after some pain, prosperity. When Labor today argues the Coalition is sacrificing blue-collar workers at the altar of an economic theory, it omits that in Australia, Labor was that very theory's midwife. Ask Paul Keating. Actually, don't bother. He's already given his answer when asked what he'd say to blue-collar workers whose jobs disappeared on his watch: ''What do I say: what's your new job like? … I mean, did we ever hurt anybody liberating them from the car assembly line?''For now, an argument rages on whether more government money would have saved Holden. The opposition insists $150 million would have done it. The government points out that Holden, like Ford before it has been ''saved'' in this manner several times before, only to be unsaved and threaten to leave again. The truth is we'll never know because Holden won't tell us, and even if they did, they'd be guessing. Either way, the government's argument is intensely interesting because it boils down to the assertion that there is nothing it could reasonably have done to prevent this. That this decision was out of its hands, and was based on economic factors largely beyond its control. But in defending itself, it has made an epic admission: that we're not really in control of our economy.And that much is the heretical truth. We chose to make it true when we threw our lot in with the global free market. We'll never admit this in stark terms. We'll continue to argue over each sensational development such as this week's. But the grander theme cannot be resisted that we do not call our own shots; that no longer is there a hierarchy of political being with the nation-state at the top and everyone else - corporations, civil society and citizens - below. Power is shared now. Companies play countries off against each other looking for the best deal, much as you and I might haggle over a retail purchase. Our world isn't exactly borderless - and some countries are more protectionist than others - but those borders now seem to denote zones rather than dominions. The world is a country now, and nations are its cities.And that's where the difficulties start. The idea of an economy is that people can move within it; that labour flows to where it is most needed. And in the case of car manufacturing, our workers just aren't needed. Not because they're not good at what they do, but because countless other people are good at it too, and for a fraction of the cost.It's not just Australia experiencing this. Take Japan, that car manufacturing behemoth. It's lost about a quarter of its industry in the past five years. Even South Korea, whose workers earn about half of what ours do, has been in decline since 2011. These cars are now made in China and Thailand. Cheaply. Remember Gina Rinehart's declaration that Australia can't compete while Africans are prepared to work for $2 per day? The problem with her argument is not that she's wrong. It's that by the global free market's own lights, she is scandalously right.Those lights tell us to specialise; to do what we can do better, or cheaper than anyone else. That's the logic we've embraced. Just last week we signed a free trade agreement with South Korea, which both major parties had worked on. The upshot: great for agriculture, bad for car manufacturing. Labor didn't quibble. Trade Minister Andrew Robb said the agreement was about ''backing our strengths''. That's what we do now.But nations are diverse. The people within them have a huge range of skills. Globalisation's demand that every nation specialise sits in contradiction with the social fact that not everyone is well placed to fit within our specialties. The market, of course, has its solution to that, too: labour mobility. You either acquire new skills or go where your skills will be rewarded. But the social and political reality is far more complicated. Perpetual reskilling is expensive and not always successful, and Holden's workforce isn't about to move to Thailand.The larger story here isn't really about our car industry, or whether we could have delayed Holden's decision to some other day. It's about the fact that our politics doesn't match our economics: that the assumptions of a hyper-specialised global free market and its effortlessly mobile labour force don't reflect the more diversified, comparatively static nature of our societies. Twenty years from now Holden's departure will be just another marker on a journey whose direction is clear and irreversible. We'll continue shedding industries. We'll continue developing new ones. But no one can honestly guarantee that the same people harmed in the first process will be rescued by the second. And the political heat this generates will merely disguise the fact that this is a matter of political consensus. "], ["Equality more than just a matter of language", "November 1, 2013", "0", " Amid all the pyrotechnics surrounding same-sex marriage this week, it's important to remember that this is overwhelmingly a symbolic debate. That doesn't mean it's unimportant. Symbolism matters to us in a visceral way, sometimes even more than substance. That is why flag-burning is such a provocative act. But it's important to know when something is symbolic so we can assess what has, or hasn't, been achieved.It's true there are real, substantive issues of discrimination at play. Same-sex couples don't have the same rights and entitlements as married heterosexual ones do on a range of things: workers' compensation, death benefits, pensions for the partners of defence force veterans, access to carer's leave, for example.It's true same-sex marriage would quickly remedy this. But it's also true that you could remove that discrimination by amending the way those entitlements work without even thinking about same-sex marriage. And if you did that, marriage-equality activists would still want to change the definition of marriage, and their opponents would still resist. In fact, their opponents would probably be happy to give same-sex couples all those rights if they'd just leave marriage alone.That's why the ACT government found itself in court this week, defending its marriage equality legislation from the federal government's legal attack, why a same-sex marriage bill was debated in the NSW Parliament on Thursday, and why the Tasmanian upper house ultimately decided not to proceed with similar legislation of its own. None of these laws, which could operate only at state and territory levels, remedy same-sex discrimination in a stroke. They are political acts designed to make symbolic, political statements.This is clearest in the case of the ACT legislation, which, one way or another, is doomed to failure. Even if it wins in the High Court, the federal government can - and almost certainly will - override the legislation because it has the power to do that to a territory. The ACT will have opened the way for states, but territorians must surely know that every marriage they contract under this legislation will one day be annulled. The ACT government surely knows this, too. It isn't looking for a substantive result. It's trying to apply pressure to the federal government.But something strange has arisen this week in the attempt to do that. So strong is the sense that marriage equality's moment is approaching, and so frenzied is the race to get there that marriage-equality advocates have begun, in the most subtle but truly remarkable way, to argue against their own position.The ACT's fight with the federal government comes down to whether or not the federal Marriage Act is intended to be a comprehensive statement on the definition of marriage, which precludes the states from having anything to say on the matter. If so, the laws are inconsistent and the federal law prevails. This is for the High Court to decide, and while the ACT certainly has a chance of winning, there's no doubt it's vulnerable. At least, that is the view of Bret Walker, SC, one of the country's best constitutional lawyers, who has been advising Australian Marriage Equality. But, he says, the NSW bill and its (now defunct) Tasmanian counterpart are on stronger ground.The key difference is that those bills don't attempt to redefine marriage. In fact, they avoid legislating on marriage at all. Instead, they create a new species of legal relationship that happens to be called ''same-sex marriage''. Since this is not the same thing as ''marriage'' in the meaning of federal law, it can't be treading on federal toes. It's a neat legal technique. It's a strong legal argument. The only problem for marriage-equality activists is that it completely undermines the cause. This is not simply a small matter of language. It's about changing the whole concept of the legislation.The very purpose of marriage equality is to extend the definition of marriage so it is blind to gender. That's what the ACT bill is attempting to do. And that's exactly what you don't do by sidestepping this process and creating an entirely new social construct that just happens to have ''marriage'' in its name. A ''same-sex marriage'' is just a civil union by a more political name.Really, you can call it what you like - a ''consolation marriage'' might be most honest - you've done nothing to change the legal definition of marriage. The NSW bill might offer same-sex marriage, but it's not offering marriage equality. It's a bit like republicans finally replacing the monarch with a system of hereditary, foreign-born presidents.As symbolic achievements go, that would be relatively anaemic. But now you have marriage-equality activists, who are typically uninspired by the prospect of civil unions, pleading with the ACT government to enact precisely that, and reacting angrily when it refuses to do so. Take independent NSW MP Alex Greenwich's warning that ''it is not going to be Tony Abbott, it is not going to be the High Court that will be blamed for the invalidation of these marriages, it will be the ACT government that will be blamed''. Perhaps. But the ACT's response would surely be that at least they had marriages to annul.Meanwhile, opponents of marriage equality, who frequently offer civil unions as some kind of compromise, seem not to have seen the opportunity. Presently, they're delighting in their victory in Tasmania, but the staggering onward march of same-sex marriage - which now transcends traditional partisan or conservative/progressive lines - suggests that victory can only be pyrrhic. Perhaps their best strategy would be to limit same-sex marriage to consolation, state-level status, especially if their opponents seem happy with that. One look at the NSW and Tasmanian bills and they should be leaping on them, screaming: ''Deal! Are we done, now?'' "], ["First the Islamic car, now you can't say Allah", "October 18, 2013", "0", " Six years ago, Proton - Malaysia's national car maker - teamed up with carmakers in Iran and Turkey pledging to develop the world's first ''Islamic car''. Apparently automobiles had hitherto been non-Muslims.If that's not absurd enough, this week we learnt it's a good thing Malaysian cars can't talk, because if they could, they'd no longer be able to use the word ''Allah'' to mean ''God''. That's what a Malaysian appeal court ruled this week, after a Catholic, Malay-language newspaper had dared to drop the A-bomb.The ''Allah'' controversy has been running for years, and isn't over yet. This decision overturned the original finding from 2009 in favour of the newspaper. Now the editor is planning to appeal to the highest court in the country and the government will resist.This immediately reminded me of Proton's Islamic car: strip both these stories of the pious language that decorates them, and they're ultimately about the maintenance of Malay pride. These are symbolic gestures of ethno-nationalism. And that whole issue is becoming increasingly radioactive in Malaysian politics and society.To see this, consider what precisely makes the Islamic car so ''Islamic'': compartments for storing a headscarf and Koran, and a compass to indicate the direction of Mecca. That's it. As though no car in history has sported a compass or storage. If you're in any doubt about how thin this Islamic veneer is, consider that Proton was considering a ''secular'' version for non-Muslim majority markets.This is not about function. It's not meeting a consumer need. This is appealing to consumer identity. It's selling a feeling of authenticity. Don't just be a Muslim. Be very Muslim. The content of that commitment matters far less than the statement it makes.The ''Allah'' imbroglio is altogether more serious, but no less strange. Arab Christians, Jews and pagans were using the word before Islam came along. The word has always appeared in Arabic translations of the Bible without controversy. The same ultimately came to be true in the Malay language, which incorporates plenty of Arabic lexicon. So it's hardly surprising that Malaysian Christians have been using the word, too. For longer than Malaysia has existed, as it happens. It's in their Bibles, too.Why should this suddenly be a problem? The Malaysian court held that Allah ''is not an integral part of the faith in Christianity'' and that therefore its use in a Catholic newspaper ''will cause confusion in the community''. The fear, apparently, is that Muslims will suddenly start practising Christianity if both faith groups refer to God by the same name. Malaysian Muslims therefore need a form of protection from their own ignorance that no Muslim community has needed anywhere at any time.But this isn't about that. If it were, you'd expect Malaysia's Islamist opposition party (PAS) to be at the forefront of this charge. But they aren't. In fact, they're mildly opposed.This is instead about an old guard of Malays (who are officially always Muslims) confronting the fact the privileged position they've held for the first 50 years of Malaysian independence simply can't hold for the next 50. Now they're lashing out, as if trying to resist the death throes of their own supremacy.That supremacy is a matter of law. Indeed it's in the constitution, which establishes Malay quotas for entry into civil service, public education, and access to federal business licences. The idea was partly that Malays - who were vastly economically disadvantaged - would gain ground on the far wealthier Chinese. When the British drafted this law, the intention was that it would be temporary. Turns out it wasn't, and race has been a constant inflammation point in Malaysian politics ever since, as several race riots demonstrate.The ruling party, UMNO, is the great defender of this privilege. For decades it has served it well. But that edifice crumbled in 2008, when it lost an astonishing 58 seats and barely carried the popular vote. This year it lost even that, and clings to power only thanks to a brazen gerrymander.Its only solution seems to be to divide and conquer: to sell the image of a Malaysia where Malay supremacy is threatened by insurrectionist minorities - and indeed where its own power is falling victim to a ''Chinese tsunami''.Its newspapers boomed headlines such as ''What else do the Chinese want?'' and ''Chinese voters are two-faced''. Little wonder, then, that the government's non-Malay vote is now almost non-existent.But it's the diving Malay vote that is most interesting. Young, educated, urban Malays in particular are deserting this brand of politics. They're becoming increasingly sceptical of their privileged status. For all the affirmative action, they remain behind economically. Special access to government contracts has simply meant Malays with good (often familial) government connections get rich, while most watch on from their scarcely adequate dwellings. What began as empowerment ended in corruption.I don't know what became of the Islamic car. I've found barely any trace of it since it was announced in 2007. Maybe it was never made, because a new conception of Malaysia was made instead, a step removed from the identity politics of the colonial era, full of upwardly mobile people who aren't likely to be swayed by a Mecca-oriented compass.I guess that's the problem with being a car manufacturer: you have to accept social evolution at some point. You can't really gerrymander your way to a profit. "], ["Republicans to struggle with crisis they created", "October 4, 2013", "0", " Contrary to obvious appearances, the Republicans in Congress who this week forced the US government into a coma are not insane. That doesn't mean this wasn't an insane result. It was, on almost every level. That includes the level of pure politics, with polling showing predictably that the American people see no need for this mess, and even Republicans acknowledging that the electorate will blame them, not President Obama.They know this because that's what happened the last time they tried this in the mid-'90s, handing Bill Clinton a political gift he took all the way to a landslide victory in 1996. The Republicans are not merely holding a gun to the nation's head; they're holding one to their own.But that doesn't make individual Republicans ''lemmings with suicide vests'', as one of their own described them. It's not that simple. As individuals, Republican politicians are embracing this insanity for perfectly sane reasons. And that's the problem. The political system is now such that Republicans keep their jobs by making the party as a whole increasingly unelectable.This week's farce has its roots in 2010 when Republicans swept their way to majorities in both houses of Congress. It was a stunning return from exile, after Democrats had banished them from every limb of the government in 2008. But then Republicans tried to entrench their position through a colossal gerrymander. Several Republican-controlled states proceeded to redraw their electoral boundaries to make Democrat success nigh on impossible. And it worked. By 2012, results in the House of Representatives were so skewed that the Republicans comfortably maintained their majority despite Democrat candidates receiving more than a million more votes.Take Pennsylvania, where Democrats won nearly 51 per cent of the vote, but Republicans won 13 seats to five. Or Michigan where the Democrat vote was nearly 53 per cent while Republicans took almost twice as many seats. North Carolina: 51-49 to the Democrats but nine Republican seats to a paltry four. And on it goes. That sort of result landed in at least 10 states - only one of which was rigged to favour the Democrats. To get a sense of the scale of it, consider that in the seven states redrawn by Republicans, near parity voting (16.7 million votes to 16.4 million) delivered 73 Republicans and 34 Democrats.That's a clear perversion of democracy and it's no accident. Indeed the Republican State Leadership Committee made it explicit. They ran a $30 million project called Redmap, aimed at winning key seats at the state level, which would give them the power to draw electoral boundaries. What's more, they planned to do this in a census year so they could draw with precision - 2010 was exactly such a year.So the plan worked. They played the system. But now the system is playing them. Sure, Republicans look set to control the House well into the future. But in the American system, the political contest doesn't simply vanish. It shifts to the primaries. Now if you're a Republican House member, your greatest threat comes not from Democrats, but from other Republican challengers hungry for your seat. The result is that Republicans are talking more and more to their own base, and less and less to everyone else. It's the rational thing for a politician to do. Even if that base is becoming increasingly irrational.Old-school Republicans might shake their heads at the rising rabidity of their Tea Party colleagues, but the truth is they're currently no match for them. The last thing aspiring congressional Republicans need is a well-funded lobby group running campaigns lacerating them as closet socialists. Freed from the need to defeat any meaningful Democrat challenge, Republican politics is now such that everyone's racing to outbid each other for the mantle of true believer. It's a classic case of a closed system encouraging ever more radical posturing.It doesn't get much more radical than trying to bring the government down. And that's the real concern here: what if this isn't really about Obamacare at all? What if the government shutdown itself is the goal? Truth be told, Republican candidates have been talking about doing this since 2010. Back then it was just as likely about budget cuts - ''a down payment on fiscal sanity'' is that well-worn Republican phrase. Either way the subtext has always been the same: that shutting down the government would be a good thing; it would not usher in the kind of dysfunction that, say, in a country like ours happens once in 100 years and causes a government to be dismissed.America's problem is even more serious than it now appears. America is now two artificially created countries, operating in parallel. There's the country that chooses presidents and the one that can only rail righteously against them. The country where funding the government is a matter of sensible routine and the country where shutting down the government is a badge of pride, a slogan you can sell.The Republican Party is going to have to figure out which country it wants to rule because these countries cannot be reconciled. They won't be until every state hands over the power to draw electoral boundaries to an independent, non-political body. In the meantime, the Republican Party is trapped in a bubble largely of its own making. "], ["Learning the limits of small l-liberalism", "September 20, 2013", "0", " When acting opposition leader Chris Bowen quipped this week that there were now more women in Afghanistan's cabinet than Australia's, he must have known the line would stick. In fact, it seems to have inspired an entire genre of commentary. Witness Steph Harmon's viral post on Junkee listing \"Things That Have More Women In Them Than Tony Abbott's Cabinet\": Zoo Weekly's staff meeting; the Saudi Arabia Olympics Team; the Iranian cabinet; Tony Abbott's immediate family. And on it goes. One bright spark on Twitter pointed out that Julia Gillard's first cabinet had more prime ministers than Abbott's has women.It's funny. It's sharp. It's a point amusingly and efficiently made. That is until you stop and think about it. Beyond the clear rhetorical effect, what actually is the point? That this cabinet is embarrassingly male? Sure. But then what? What precise conclusion about this is being urged upon us?I suspect the conclusion is all about Tony Abbott. This, you sense, is the anti-Abbott sector's smoking gun, the evidence that proves his sexism once and for all. \"He simply cannot accept women as equals and can only relate to them … as wives, mothers and daughters,\" declares Tim Dunlop in The Drum, neatly capturing this approach. I very much doubt Bowen is suggesting women's interests are less represented in Australia than in Afghanistan. But I have little doubt he's prodding us to wonder whether Abbott would change that if he had his way. The point is to present Abbott as the ultimate regressive: the misogynist homophobe from yesteryear trying desperately to drag us back to some darker age. That's why Labor is so keen to point out that Abbott's is the first cabinet without a dedicated science minister since 1931.This brand of argument is pointless for at least two reasons. First, it has been thoroughly agitated by Abbott's foes for years now. A couple of weeks ago the nation either rejected it as untrue or deemed it an irrelevance. That Abbott has kept his male-dominated shadow cabinet largely in place - pretty much as he said he would - is unlikely to cause Australians to revise their judgment wildly.But second (and most importantly) it misses the point. This isn't about Tony Abbott. It's much bigger than that. It's not even just about gender. There's a broader philosophy at work here that calls into question our society's ability to deal with disadvantage of just about any kind.\"I never want to see affirmative action,\" affirmed Bronwyn Bishop in defence of Abbott's cabinet choices. She recounted her struggle to become a NSW senator when no woman had done so previously. \"They didn't choose me then but I didn't go away and whinge about it either. I just worked hard so they chose me subsequently.\"It's a neat, if austere theory of success that comes very much from the Liberal Party's philosophical heart. Hard work is rewarded. Success is in the hands of the individual. This is why Bronwyn Bishop maintains Julia Gillard's misogyny speech was \"disgraceful\": because it \"was playing the victim\". This view of society doesn't see victims - at least not on the basis of, say, gender, race or class. It sees individuals who bear the responsibility of their own plight.This is the downside of liberalism, where society is boiled down to individuals and the choices they make. This promises equality of a sort, because it prevents, say, an individual from a despised minority from having to conform to the majority's prejudice. But this also means society's most powerful people are freed from the claims of its least powerful. So women might be free to break the bonds of their traditional gender roles, but if they find they're excluded from the most senior positions by an informal boys' club, then liberalism will probably have little to offer them. After all, these boys are free to associate informally, and barring the most overt discrimination, are free to work with whomever they fancy. Liberalism might save you from formalised slavery, but it will hardly storm the barricades of inherited privilege. In fact, it hardly notices them.This is a quandary facing any liberation movement in a liberal society, of which feminism is only the most newsy example of the moment. Part of the agenda is always to maximise choice, which is why freedom of choice is probably our society's most definitive value. Liberalism has been a useful tool for claiming rights. But the logic on which that rests ultimately keeps glass ceilings in place. Choice is the opposite of coercion. And only coercion is likely to shatter the glass.It's not hard to find senior businessmen who will extol the virtues of more women in senior business roles, for instance. Some can even point to the obstacles to this utopia - such as the absence of suitable childcare arrangements. But ask them to pay more tax to fund those arrangements and they'll laugh at you. Ask them to take on a quota and they might even fume. After all, it compromises their freedom of choice. But if we make these choices from vastly unequal positions, then on balance, the interests of the powerful are likely to prevail, and the status quo proceeds mostly undisturbed. That's not a matter of a sexist individual here and there. It's a matter of structural disadvantage.That's why so few women are on our top corporate boards, despite the mountains of research showing companies with diverse boards will do better. It's why the faces on our televisions - or indeed in our Parliament - remain overwhelmingly white even as our society has become hypercoloured. And it's why, for all the lamenting of the absence of women in Abbott's cabinet, that cabinet is still able to make history by appointing Julie Bishop Australia's first female foreign minister.Clearly, that history is easy to make. It will remain that way as long as we have no language to talk other than one of choice and freedom; as long as our politics becomes about individual leaders and the choices they make rather than the broader questions of the way our society works. So many of those presently railing at Abbott would probably, proudly describe themselves as small-l liberals. But would they understand the limits of what they're saying? "], ["Egyptians have sacrificed so much and gained so little", "July 12, 2013", "0", " Suppose Egypt held free and fair presidential elections tomorrow. Suppose Mohammed Mursi was free to contest and, suppose he won. What then? Would the millions of protesters who urged the military to depose him be suddenly converted? And if not, what would we make of their cries, knowing that despite their impressive numbers, they represent an electoral minority?The fact is that if such an election were held tomorrow, it would take someone very brave, or very partisan, to guarantee Mursi would lose. And yet the military is holding him under arrest, ostensibly on behalf of the people.Democratic change does not occur pre-emptively with the help of tanks. It's important to be clear on this point because for decades the fear of Middle Eastern democracy was that it would deliver an Islamist government that would proceed to dismantle that very same democracy. It may be \"one man, one vote, one time\", but the irony is that much of the region's recent history points in the opposite direction, where a secular military has attempted (sometimes successfully) to subvert Islamist democracy. Think Turkey. Or Algeria.Unfortunately this line of thinking plays to Islamism's strongest, and most dangerous, suit. It deprives Islamists of democratic hope and positions them as liberators against an authoritarian regime. Islamist politics works best in opposition, when it can talk the language of resistance and not be held to the test of delivering on its ideals.Egypt's Muslim Brotherhood can now talk that language once more. Its take-home message seems to be that the entire system of democratic governance is stacked against it. Even when it wins, it loses. As the Algerian experience shows, that is dangerous. In that case, the military dissolved parliament and annulled elections once the Islamist party looked likely to win. The result was a decade-long Islamist insurgency that took about 150,000 lives.Now consider the Brotherhood's next move. Already it has decried \"the repressive practices of the police state\" and declared it will \"refuse to participate in any action with power usurpers\".The fall of Hosni Mubarak was such a monumental moment in the region's history because it sent two messages. First, that autocrats could be removed by the mobilisation of ordinary people without resorting to the revolutionary violence Islamist movements often declared necessary. Second, that if Islamists wanted political influence, they could have it by buying into the democratic process. In a stroke it seemed militant Islamism had run its course, having achieved no revolutionary change in its decades of carnage and being left behind by the democratic impulse of the masses. This much could be seen in al-Qaeda's limp reaction to the uprisings. It was compelled to celebrate the fall of these dictators but could claim none of the credit. But in the past week, both these messages have been undermined.It's not true that Egypt is back where it started two years ago. With what looks suspiciously like the military firing on a crowd of Islamist protesters in prayer, and with the Brotherhood leadership arrested, instead it's the country that has gone backwards.Before it was at least unified by a dream, now it is hopelessly divided, apparently without even the most basic agreement that its differences will be resolved periodically by elections. Mursi made some big mistakes. Perhaps his first was to nominate for president when the Brotherhood promised it would not field a candidate. Once in power, he promised an economic recovery that was never going to happen. He issued, then retracted, a decree that made his executive decisions above the scrutiny of the courts and shoved through a constitution (via a hasty referendum) with an unnecessarily partisan flavour.This immediately alienated those sectors of society not sympathetic to his cause, guaranteeing a political environment of perpetual suspicion and protest. And that's to say nothing of the violence against religious minorities that occurred on his watch.But he should have been allowed to crash at an election. He might then have ended up a symbol of the Brotherhood's political failure. Instead he'll be a symbol of democratic failure, with all that entails. Meanwhile, the depth of Egyptian division means those who called for Mursi's head will eventually start calling for each other's, while its economic disaster (which was hardly Mursi's making) means no new president will be its saviour. If so, we'll be left to ask precisely what has been gained by all this. What will be much clearer, though, is what has been sacrificed. "], ["Turkey's secular story is beginning to unravel", "June 14, 2013", "0", " You know something extraordinary is happening when sworn enemies are locking arms in solidarity. And right now in Turkey, something extraordinary is happening. Ultra-nationalists are uniting with the Kurdish activists whose rights they have so long denied, and together they face the tear-gas and water cannon the police unleash on them.Beside them are seasoned opposition supporters and young urban Turks, children and adolescents, many of them with very shallow histories of political engagement. ''Those who wanted to kill each other last week became - no exaggeration - comrades on the streets,'' wrote Turkish journalist Ece Temelkuran in New Statesman.The most transformational protests are often the product of wildly varied groups who agree on little except what they hate. Indeed, that is very much the story of the Arab uprisings that continue to reverberate across the region.These Turkish protests are not quite of that revolutionary moment. There is no prospect of Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan being toppled, and even if he were it would hardly be the collapse of a decades-old dictatorial regime. But these protests are revolutionary in a different way. This might just be the moment that the fault lines of Turkish politics are radically recast.Until now, those fault lines have been abundantly clear. The classic power struggle is between what Turks often call ''White Turks'' and ''Black Turks'': a secular elite, led by the army, who see themselves as the defenders of Ataturk's nationalist legacy, and the more traditional, religiously inclined masses.The racial imagery is deliberate. White Turks are meant to be the equivalent of our own WASPs. They are socially empowered, overwhelmingly urban, wealthier and better educated. They have Western lifestyles, adopt Western modes of dress and drink Western alcohol. They also tend to look down on ''blacks'', whom they regard as unrefined because of their religious commitments and cultural conservatism.The divide is bitter, enduring and never far from the surface. When one professor of international relations was asked this week about the rapidly changing nature of Istanbul as more upwardly mobile Black Turks had taken jobs there, he told The New York Times the city had ''been invaded by Anatolian peasants'', whom he regarded as ''uncultured''.Erdogan has scarcely pretended to be a unifying figure. ''Your brother Tayyip belongs to the Black Turks,'' he famously declared about 15 years ago. Little wonder the military has long wanted to destroy him.In 2008, for instance, it went to the Constitutional Court and asked it to ban Erdogan's Justice and Development Party (or AKP) on the basis that it was ''a focal point of anti-secular activities'' and was ''trying to turn the country into an Islamic state''. The case was lost, but the audacity of it was telling: this was nothing less than an attempt to remove a democratically elected government that only the previous year had won in a landslide.Since 1960, the military has also executed three more traditional coups. In its zeal to preserve Turkey's secular nationalism, the military has long arrogated to itself the power to subvert the democratic will.And that has always been the basis of Erdogan's legitimacy. Whatever the secular elite want to say about him, and whatever threats the military wanted to make, he had the people demonstrably on his side. Erdogan has been winning elections for 10 years, and winning them emphatically. The military had inherited privilege and an ideology to support it, but it had no popular mandate. This only became more important when Turkey's tilt at EU membership required it to enhance its democratic credentials and establish civilian control over the military. That's a Herculean task but Erdogan has carried it off.The high-water mark is surely the successful constitutional referendum held on the highly symbolic date of September 12, 2010 - exactly 30 years after the 1980 military coup. This sent military power into serious retreat because among its suite of reforms it abolished the legal protection enjoyed by coup leaders. Plotting a coup would be a crime against the state, prosecuted in civilian courts. This was perhaps the most significant liberal democratic reform in Turkey's history, and it left the military with nowhere to go.It's a story that confounds Western notions that secularism is always liberal and freedom-enhancing, and religious politics is always on the side of authoritarianism. Here, authoritarianism was secularism's handmaiden.To be liberal and democratic was to vote with the Black Turks. But now that story is starting to unravel. Now Erdogan is the one striking a dictatorial pose.After a period of remarkable improvement - marked by a significant decline in torture and the recognition of the cultural rights of the Kurdish minority - Turkey's human rights record is regressing. Turkey now has more journalists in prison than any other country. Many of them have not been charged. A mandatory internet filtering regime is in place. Opposition politicians and human rights lawyers have been arrested and imprisoned. Now they're gassing protesters.''They are drunk with power,'' says one academic observer of Erdogan's government. ''They lost their democratic reflexes and are returning to what is the essence of Turkish politics: authoritarianism.''And that's what these protests - which began with a sit-in against a planned shopping mall - are really about. The old secular/religious division is falling away. There are not just White Turks and Black Turks any more. Amid the diverse fray we are witnessing the arrival of something Turkish politics has never really seen but desperately needs. Meet the Grey Turks: young, urban, well educated - not necessarily secular, but definitely democratic. "], ["When making war is so easy, Obama's doubts about morality of some drone strikes may be irrelevant", "May 31, 2013", "0", " With great power comes unaccountability. Until now the Western world, under the cover of the world's sole superpower, has scarcely needed to engage with the ethics of using armed drones.Occasionally, a drone strike would make the news. Occasionally, some commentator or other would gnash teeth. Almost always anti-American anger and resentment would grow in the countries where the strike happened. But ultimately, no one can actually do anything about any of this. So, overwhelmingly the Obama administration gave no answers to questions that weren't asked.But all that's changing. US President Barack Obama has just confessed that using drones is not ''wise or moral in every instance'', and that they should be used as a last resort. This is largely a response to growing US discontent about his administration's mysterious drone program. We now know that American drones have killed four of the country's own citizens. So the President is asking Congress to help him develop some kind of oversight for American drone use to ensure they are used only against people who are ''a continuing, imminent threat to Americans'' and cannot be captured.Obama's reckoning with the ethics of drones is welcome. But what if it's too late? What if he's unleashed a mode of warfare he cannot control, and we'll come one day to regret?It seems inevitable that lots of countries will soon enough have drones of their own. Perhaps the most overlooked story of the year comes from China, where the People's Liberation Army hatched a plan to send a drone to Myanmar to assassinate a drug trafficker who had murdered 13 Chinese nationals. As it happens, the Chinese government didn't go ahead with it, but not because it couldn't. In fact, China is developing quite a fleet. And it has plans to share them around.A US drone costs anywhere from $5 million to $10 million. Depending on who you believe, China can build them for less than $1 million. If that's true, you can forget any idea of an American monopoly on the drone market. Now consider China's customers: countries who want cheap weapons, and who'd rather not buy them from America or Israel. Really, anyone in the developing world is a candidate. It's hard to resist the conclusion that we're staring at the future of warfare.Is that a bad thing? To date the arguments for and against drones have focused on civilian casualties. Put briefly, critics claim a high civilian toll from the American program, while its defenders claim drones have greater precision, get into places that soldiers can't and, therefore, limit what is so grotesquely called ''collateral damage''. The focus on civilian deaths is noble, but the argument is futile. The truth - indeed the very problem - is that we're in the dark on this.No one knows how many civilians have been killed. The British-based Bureau of Investigative Journalism puts the number at more than 1000, but there's no way of knowing. The US government hints that the figure is lower, but won't give one of its own, and even if it did it might not mean much.But even if we could get a reliable figure, it's unclear precisely what it would mean. How many civilians would have died if conventional weapons were used instead? How many (if any) of these strikes would not have gone ahead if drones weren't available? Sadly, we're in an era when civilian deaths are deemed an acceptable inevitability of war, rather than a reason to avoid it.Whatever the truth of these claims and counterclaims, perhaps the best objections to drone warfare have nothing to do with pragmatic arguments over counting bodies. The central problem is drones permit a kind of no-risk, low-cost warfare. Indeed, they so radically and fundamentally alter the nature of war that they risk making war seem far less grave, and far easier to wage.War is a kind of contract. Each side confronts the other, with the risk of death and defeat. In short, war should come at a cost. That contract is shredded when you're attacked by something that cannot itself be killed. It's not remotely a fair fight. It's scarcely a fight at all. "], ["A red dawn hovers over the West's privilege of cultural supremacy", "May 3, 2013", "0", " Turns out Robert Downey jnr is a Sinophile. ''I live a very Chinese life in America,'' he recently declared. I don't know what that means, either. But I'm pretty sure it has a lot to do with money. He was speaking at the international promotional launch of Iron Man 3, which took place not in Los Angeles, New York or London, but in Beijing. Behind the gates of the Forbidden City, no less.None of this happened by accident. When  Iron Man 3 hits Chinese cinemas this week, audiences will be seeing a special edit of the film made just for them. It will feature extra sequences shot in China and expanded roles for some Chinese film stars. It will have lucrative product placement from the Chinese tech giant TCL. Indeed, the entire film is a collaboration between Disney and the Chinese production studio DMG Entertainment.The film market reflects the geopolitics of our age. America will not be much longer an unrivalled superpower, and China's rise is unstoppable. ''There's always been a number two,'' DMG chief executive Dan Mintz explained. ''But this is the first time anyone is challenging for number one''. It will win that challenge by 2020. Hence, the quest for the Chinese dollar is on - and it has been ever since James Cameron grossed 222 million of them with Avatar.But that means playing by Chinese rules. In Iron Man 3's case, Chinese government officials were on set to ''monitor filming''. Several other films have shown similar, um, sensitivity. Ugly depictions of the sex trade in the Chinese region of Macau were reportedly dumped from Skyfall, as was a scene in which a Chinese security guard is assassinated. The apocalyptic zombies in World War Z were the result of a Chinese SARS-like virus, until Paramount thought better of it and made the source a Moscow flu, first spotted - of course - by a Chinese scientist. Then there's last year's remake of Red Dawn with an altered plot that has the US invaded not by China, but by North Korea. Or Looper, which depicts a future in which the capital of the world is Beijing, rather than Paris, which was the original plan.I could go on, but the pattern is clear. ''The adjustment of some of our films for different world markets is a commercial reality, and we recognise China's right to determine what content enters their country,'' a spokesman for the Motion Picture Association of America said. That's management-speak for ''we have no choice about this if we want to make money … and we do''.Clearly not everyone is comfortable about all this. A quick scan of the news coverage of Hollywood's Chinese courtship turns up headlines about ''bowing'' and ''kowtowing'' to Chinese sensibilities. Similarly, when Qantas announced recently that - owing to its new partnership with Emirates - pork would not be available on flights going through Dubai, some Australians threatened to boycott Qantas, condemning it for ''sleeping with the Islamic enemy'' and saying ''[our] religion has been disrespected by the removal of pork products'' - because apparently eating pork is now some kind of sacrament. Meanwhile Qantas' ticket sales to Europe have increased 500 per cent.Welcome to the Asian century. It begins with commerce, but it must inevitably encompass so much more than that. We talk often about how economic power brings with it political and military power. Less frequently do we recognise it brings cultural power, too. So if the age of Western economic domination is coming slowly to an end, so too is the age of Western cultural domination. Hollywood's Chinese dalliance, or Qantas' new menu, are merely the seedlings of this inevitable change.It has never been entirely true that globalisation is something only the West does to the East. But it is true that its impacts are not evenly felt. Some Eastern phenomena do travel West - Bollywood and Gangnam Style being perhaps the cheesiest examples - but for sheer cultural hegemony, nothing really competes with the West. It is a rare country that escaped all Americanisation of its culture during the 20th century.But the worm of globalisation is turning. Those screeching at pork-free Qantas flights have probably never given any thought to the fact that almost every Middle Eastern airline - including Emirates - serves alcohol, subordinating the region's own cultural and religious norms to the desires of paying customers. I doubt we'd ever call that ''kowtowing''.Very few of us will have wondered what it must be like for the developed world to face a steady bombardment of Western sitcoms, action flicks and romantic comedies that, at least until now, were made without a second thought for their compatibility with the cultural values of those societies.What must it mean to an Asian musician to know that the only path to global stardom is through Western music alone, and that even then the chances are far slimmer than for their American counterparts? We've probably never considered what impact it must have on dark-skinned women around the world to see the fashion centres of Europe producing globally famous white supermodels, which must surely reinforce notions of beauty they can never attain without buying some whitening cream or other product. (Which they do. A lot.) "], ["Terrorism: how we manage it differently now", "April 19, 2013", "0", " Let's clear something up. Our responses to terrorism are not about the loss of innocent life. We think they are because that's the first thing we talk about. We use the suffering of victims to emote, and we look at the attacks through that prism. But it's never really about the victims. It's about us.It's about the magnetic trauma of watching these attacks repeat on our news services. It's about the fact that each of us is entirely interchangeable with the killed and injured; that we can so easily transpose ourselves into the situation. It's about the brutal unpredictability of the violence.This is partly why this week's Boston Marathon bombings have attracted so much more of our attention than the much deadlier Iraq bombings on the same day. It's not just that we don't value Iraqi lives as much as US ones (although this is undoubtedly true given our ability to rationalise away the mammoth loss of civilian life in the Iraq war). It's that there is nothing truly surprising about them. They do not shock us. And thus, they cannot truly terrorise us.Terrorism is a grotesque form of theatre. It doesn't exist without its audience, which is why it's always public. The show is for us. The most futile terrorist attack is the one we fail to notice. So, it is designed to seize our emotions; to make us incapable of ignoring it. This is terrorism's paradox: it succeeds only because we make it. We ultimately decide whether it is effective. And generally we react wildly, rewarding the terrorists who have sought to provoke us.But something is different this time. President Barack Obama's initial response was to tell us all the things we didn't know. ''We don't yet have all the answers,'' he began. ''We still do not know who did this, or why. And people should not jump to conclusions before we have all the facts.'' His tone was cool and authoritative - described by Time as ''efficient formality'' - as though he was determined to avoid any emotional response. Only the next day did he describe the blasts as ''an act of terror''.Closer to home, Foreign Affairs Minister Bob Carr responded by telling Australians considering travel to the US ''I wouldn't alter my travel arrangements. This is something that, the way we live now, could occur at any time. In fact, if you look at the experience of terrorism since September 11, 2001 … what is striking is how little progress in over a decade the terrorists have made.''Meanwhile, NSW Premier Barry O'Farrell rejected suggestions of a suffocating security crackdown on the City to Surf, since that would mean it was ''not of the same character'' and ''would actually give a win to those people who engage in those sorts of acts of violence''.This is a far cry from the kind of hysteria that typically follows a terrorist attack. There's no talk of smoking anyone out of their holes, or bombing anyone back to the Stone Age. There's no with-us-or-against us ultimatum. Sure, this attack isn't as apocalyptic as September 11. But it is just about impossible to imagine that if the Boston Marathon had been bombed 12 years ago, the response would have been so restrained. It's almost as if we're dealing with an unfortunate matter of routine.Even the media coverage has, generally, followed suit. Yes, the New York Post got it about as wrong as possible when it declared 12 people had died, and that a Saudi national had been identified as a suspect. But then, the Post has long since given up on being a real newspaper. More reputable organisations such as CNN and the Associated Press committed one howler, reporting a suspect had been arrested when that wasn't true and prompting a swift, terse rebuke from authorities.But this was no Oslo debacle, when every outlet from The New York Times to the BBC proceeded cheerfully on the basis that the terrorists were connected somehow with al-Qaeda. We're witnessing something truly remarkable: media outlets almost sticking to reporting what they know, and not racing ahead of a terrorism story. Ever since the bombs detonated, we've confronted something of a deafening silence; a huge vacuum in the story. Why are so few attempting to fill it?I have two theories on this. The most encouraging one is that we're finally maturing in the way we handle terrorism. Gone is the triumphalist rhetoric of the ''War on Terror'', with its ridiculous promises of a terrorism-free world and the ultimate victory of freedom over tyranny. In its place is a far more sober, pragmatic recognition that terrorism is a perpetual irritant, and that while it is tragic and emotionally lacerating, it kills relatively few people and is not any kind of existential threat.Perhaps we're learning to avoid being sucked into terrorism's radicalising vortex, where attack brings overreaction, and the violence rapidly escalates. And perhaps the media have been so stung by the embarrassment of Oslo that they have recognised the virtue in shutting up occasionally.But it's possible, too, that this reticence is a product of the very real suspicion that the perpetrators here are self-styled American patriots. At this point, most analysts are leaning that way. And while it's entirely possible they are wrong, there's something chilling about realising this violence might not be something that can be assigned to a demonic other. Maybe we're speaking in more hushed tones because our own societies might just be implicated.We won't know until perpetrators come to light. Does the act suddenly become more heinous if it's Islamist? Does terrorism cease to be a fact of life, and once more become an existential threat? If so, that can't be about the attack itself, which after all is the same either way. It must be about the politics, and the prejudices, we bring to it. That could be extremely revealing. Watch this space. "], ["Bomb response refreshingly honest", "April 19, 2013", "0", " Let's clear something up: our responses to terrorism are not about the loss of innocent life. We think they are because that's the first thing we talk about. We use the suffering of victims to emote, and we look at the attacks through that prism. But it's never really about the victims. It's about us. It's about the magnetic trauma of watching these attacks repeat on our news services. It's about the fact each of us is entirely interchangeable with the killed and injured; that we can so easily transpose ourselves into the situation. It's about the brutal unpredictability of the violence.This is partly why the Boston Marathon bombings have attracted so much more of our attention than the much deadlier bombings that struck Iraq on the same day. It's not just that we don't value Iraqi lives as much as American ones (although this is true, given our ability to rationalise away the mammoth loss of civilian life during the Iraq war). It's that there is nothing surprising about them. They do not shock us. And for that reason, they cannot truly terrorise us.Terrorism is a grotesque form of theatre. It doesn't exist without its audience, which is why it is always public. The show is for us. The most futile terrorist attack is the one we fail to notice. So it is designed to seize our emotions; to make us incapable of ignoring it. Thus is terrorism's paradox: it succeeds only because we make it. We ultimately decide whether or not it is effective. And generally we react wildly, thereby rewarding the terrorists who have sought to provoke us.But it is different this time. US President Barack Obama's initial response was to tell us all the things we did not know. ''We don't yet have all the answers,'' he began. ''We still do not know who did this, or why. And people should not jump to conclusions before we have all the facts.'' His tone was cool and authoritative - described by Time as ''efficient formality'' - as if he was determined to avoid any emotional response. Only the next day did he describe it as ''an act of terror''.Closer to home, Foreign Affairs Minister Bob Carr responded by telling Australians considering travel to the US: ''I wouldn't alter my travel arrangements. This is something that, the way we live now, could occur at any time. In fact, if you look at the experience of terrorism since September 11, 2001 … what is striking is how little progress in over a decade the terrorists have made.''Meanwhile, NSW Premier Barry O'Farrell rejected any suggestion of a suffocating security crackdown on the City2Surf, since that would mean it was ''not of the same character'' and ''would actually give a win to those people who engage in those sorts of acts of violence''.This is a far cry from the kind of hysteria that typically follows a terrorist attack. There's no talk of smoking anyone out of their holes, or bombing anyone back to the Stone Age. There's no with-us-or-against-us ultimatum. Sure, this attack isn't as apocalyptic as September 11. But it is just about impossible to imagine that if the Boston Marathon had been bombed 12 years ago, the response would have been so restrained. It's almost as if we're dealing with an unfortunate matter of routine.Even the media coverage has, generally, followed suit. Yes, the New York Post got it about as wrong as possible when it declared 12 people had died, and a Saudi national had been identified as a suspect. But then, the Post has long since given up on being a real newspaper.More reputable organisations such as CNN and the Associated Press committed one howler, reporting a suspect had been arrested when that was not true - prompting a swift, terse rebuke from authorities. But this was no Oslo debacle, when every outlet from The New York Times to the BBC proceeded cheerfully on the basis that the terrorists were connected somehow with al-Qaeda. We're witnessing something truly remarkable: media outlets almost sticking to reporting what they know, and not racing ahead of a terrorism story. Ever since the bombs detonated, we've confronted something of a deafening silence, a huge vacuum in the story. Why are so few attempting to fill it?I have two theories on this. The most encouraging one is that we're finally maturing in the way we handle terrorism. Gone is the triumphalist rhetoric of the ''War on Terror'', with its ridiculous promises of a terrorism-free world and the ultimate victory of freedom over tyranny. In its place is a far more sober, pragmatic recognition that terrorism is a perpetual irritant, and that while it is tragic and emotionally lacerating, it kills relatively few people and is not any kind of existential threat. Perhaps we're learning to avoid being sucked into terrorism's radicalising vortex, where attack brings overreaction, and the violence rapidly escalates. And perhaps the media have been so stung by the embarrassment of Oslo that they have recognised the virtue in shutting up occasionally.But it's possible, too, that this reticence is a product of the very real suspicion that the perpetrators here are self-styled American patriots. At this point, most analysts are leaning that way. And while it's entirely possible they are wrong, there's something chilling about realising that this violence might not be something that can be assigned to a demonic other. Maybe we're speaking in more hushed tones because our own societies might just be implicated.We won't know until perpetrators come to light. Does the act become more heinous if it is Islamist? Does terrorism cease to be a fact of life, and once more become an existential threat? If so, it cannot be about the attack itself, which, after all, is the same either way. It must be about the politics, the prejudices, we bring to it. That could be very revealing. Watch this space. "], ["Curse of Australia's silent pervasive racism", "April 5, 2013", "0", " As opening lines in letters go, ''I find you deeply offensive'' is pretty direct. Fair enough. I suspect lots of people do. It's a natural consequence of media work. But then my anonymous correspondent decided to explain why: ''You are foreign, you shall always be so. Piss off back to whatever Middle Eastern sink hole you blew in here from.''There's nothing surprising about this. There's nothing even particularly rare about it. Some version of that letter arrives every few months or so. This one was particularly unvarnished - complete with references to my wife and ''half caste kids'' and cheerful threats of the inevitable return of the White Australia policy - but the message hardly varies: this isn't my country and my public presence is unwelcome, either because I'm a Muslim, or because in some racially determinable way not a ''real'' Australian.I've been accused of everything from taking elocution lessons, to changing the spelling of my name to appear deceptively Australian before I unleash some Trojan conspiracy. Apparently Aly is roughly equivalent to Smith. They're onto me.I have almost no emotional reaction to this kind of goonish racism. It's simply too ridiculous to engage me. In fact, I'd completely forgotten about this most recent letter until racist ranting hit the headlines this week following yet another racist diatribe on a Sydney bus that was captured and posted to YouTube.It's at least the third such case in about four months. Hence the fresh round of debate on Australian racism that always seems to follow the same unedifying pattern.First comes the shock, as though such incidents reveal something we never knew existed. Then comes the argument over whether or not Australia is a racist country. To be frank, I don't know what the argument means. Every country has racism. Precisely how much do you need before a country itself is racist? Is it a matter of essence or degree? Do we judge it by surveying legislation, newspapers or behaviour on public transport? And even if we can answer those questions, then what?That argument is a dead end. It's more about a condemnatory label than the substance and nature of Australian racism. The real question isn't about which adjective describes us. It's about how best to identify and respond to the racism we inevitably harbour.Debating the meaning of the occasional racist tirade doesn't help answer that. It's just not that helpful to take extreme individual behaviour as the starting point on an issue like this. Sure, it's troubling. Sure, it's more common than we like to admit. Sure, it's a problem. But it's not the problem.The racism that really matters in Australia isn't the high-level, weapons-grade derangement that winds its way via YouTube into the news. The truth is we can't compete with Europe for hardcore white nationalism or the US for white supremacist movements. We can't compete with Asia or the Middle East for the maintenance of an explicit, institutionalised and sometimes codified racial hierarchy.Our racial and religious minorities aren't having their communities torched (though the occasional building has been firebombed), and our handful of far-right politicians aren't leading political parties that attract 20 per cent of the vote.No, our real problem is the subterranean racism that goes largely unremarked upon and that we seem unable even to detect. Like the racism revealed by an Australian National University study, which found you're significantly less likely to get a job interview if you have a non-European name. The researchers sent fake CVs in response to job advertisements, changing only the name of the applicant. It turns out that if you're surname is Chinese, you have to apply for 68 per cent more jobs to get the same number of interviews as a Anglo-Australian. If you're Middle Eastern, it's 64 per cent. If you're indigenous, 35 per cent.This is the polite racism of the educated middle class. It's not as shocking as the viral racist tirades we've seen lately. No doubt the HR managers behind these statistics would be genuinely appalled by such acts of brazen, overt racism. Indeed, they probably enforce racial discrimination rules in their workplace and are proud to do so. Nonetheless, theirs is surely a more devastating, enduring racism. There's no event to film, just the daily, invisible operation of a silent, pervasive prejudice. It doesn't get called out.It's just the way things are; a structure of society.That's what bothers me about all the fuss that surrounds these occasional racist diatribes. It puts the focus overwhelmingly on the most exceptional kinds of racist behaviour. But are we capable of recognising racism when it isn't gobsmackingly obvious? Recall, for example, the widespread failure to understand why former Telstra boss Sol Trujillo felt racially offended to being caricatured relentlessly in the press as a sleepy, sombrero-wearing Mexican on a donkey, or described as a ''Mexican bandit''. Certainly, criticise his management of Telstra, but can we really not see the gratuitous racial stereotyping? And Trujillo isn't even Mexican.Or note the strange Australian comfort with adopting blackface. Remember when Qantas gave two Wallabies fans free tickets because they promised to dress as Radike Samo by blacking up and donning Afro wigs? No offence intended. Qantas apologised.But that's the thing about racism: it goes way beyond bad intentions. The most insidious racism is just so ingrained it's involuntary. It's not about what Qantas intended. It's about the fact no one responsible for the decision even saw the existence of the problem. That sort of thing worries me much more than some crude, anonymous hate mail.It's easy to point at the barking racists on the bus precisely because they aren't us. They allow us to exonerate ourselves; to declare that if we have a problem with racism, at least people like us aren't responsible for it. It allows us to escape self-examination of the racism we all probably harbour to some extent or other.That self-examination is crucial. Without it we have nothing to fix, and only other people to blame. "], ["Abbott's adoptive strategy on policy", "September 6, 2013", "0", " It started with pious calls for \"consensus politics\". Remember them? How Bob Katter enthused about a \"new paradigm\"? Julia Gillard called for a \"new politics\", which I can only assume was roughly equivalent to Tony Abbott's \"kinder, gentler polity\". Then followed the most bitter, cantankerous Parliament in generations, in which every mere breath would be contested.Now, after all that exhausting, dispiriting muck, the end result has been a quite astonishing consensus. At the 11th hour, and almost without anyone noticing, the biggest disagreements of the past three years (the carbon tax aside) have been dissolved. Perhaps most astonishingly, several of them have been resolved in favour of the Labor government we now look set to eject.On Saturday the country will elect a party with an expensive national broadband network policy. It will vote for a party that will significantly increase education funding, at least for four years. It will elect a party that has resolved that the best way to handle asylum seekers arriving by boat is just to kick them out so some other country has to deal with them. Sure, differences remain between the parties on these issues. Some of these differences even matter; there are still fights to be had. But they are now over matters of detail rather than essence. You know something is happening when Tony Abbott is explicitly spruiking a \"unity ticket\" with Kevin Rudd on education funding (even though he fails to match Labor for the most expensive years of the Gonski plan).All this is a long way from the days when the national broadband network was a \"white elephant\", and a \"colossal waste of taxpayers' money\" that the Coalition had solemnly pledged to \"dismantle\". Now, as Alan Kohler observed when the Coalition finally proposed an alternative national broadband network of its own, \"Malcolm Turnbull's great achievement over the past 2½ years has been to save the national broadband network\". It's a long way, too, from Christopher Pyne's dismissal of Gonski as \"a Conski\"; from his insistence that \"the status quo is a better model\" of education funding before unabashedly declaring \"Labor should have been doing this last year\" and deciding to \"adopt exactly the same funding envelope as Labor\".But the grandest, most damascene conversion has come on fiscal policy. For years the Coalition has held Labor at gunpoint, demanding a return to surplus as some kind of litmus test for good government. For years, and for reasons unfathomable, Labor has played along. Having taken the perfectly defensible Keynesian path of running a deficit to stimulate the economy during a global recession, it became so obsessed with proving its deficit was temporary that it simply forgot to argue its case.The entire economic conversation revolved around a promised return to surplus by 2012-13. Nothing could divert Labor from this course. Not even a gigantic natural disaster such as the Queensland floods in 2011. If ever there was a reason - or even an excuse - to shelve the surplus and build the nation, this was it. Instead, Labor introduced a levy, pledged to cut spending, and held fast to a promise no economist seemed to think was a good idea, and which it was never going to be able to keep. The scene was bizarre. In its zealous search for a surplus, Labor kept trying to find cuts to government spending. This, of course, deflates the economy. So the Reserve Bank was frantically cutting interest rates in an attempt to stimulate. Here we had two institutions beavering away at cancelling each other out.Even when it became clear last year that both company profits and wages were falling - effectively destroying the government's tax revenue - Labor still insisted it could cut its way to surplus. By Christmas it had to concede. The surplus, once a holy grail and unexplained economic necessity, became an irresponsible goal that would compromise \"jobs and growth\". And thus ended one of Labor's most foolhardy, damaging attempts to appease the Coalition.Only now, the Coalition has converted, too. The most underrated phrase of this entire campaign was Joe Hockey's plan for \"appropriate stimulus\", even if that meant we'd have to forget about the surplus for a while. This is the same Coalition that seemed so resolutely not to believe in stimulus, that it argued against it even during the financial crisis. Well, forget that. We're all Keynesians now.Rudd can argue all he likes that Abbott will cut the economy to shreds and plunge it into recession, but he has two problems. First, this contradicts everything Labor was telling us for years when it insisted it would find whatever cuts were necessary to deliver that surplus. Second, Abbott has freed himself from the shackles of finding a surplus, thus allowing him to shelve spending cuts until there's no danger of a recession. He has manoeuvred this beautifully - exactly as Labor should have done from the start.All this is a testament to the brutal efficiency of Abbott's opposition. He's quite prepared to bludgeon the government with an argument he later rejects. It's shameless, but it works because he does it with confidence and a straight face.Contrast Labor, which has spent far too much time answering the Coalition's charges rather than telling its own story, in its own political terms. If it falls on Saturday, it will certainly leave a legacy: disability insurance, broadband, Gonski. But we won't really know what that legacy means because it has never really told us. Besides, these are Coalition policies now, too. In so many ways, Labor has won the arguments it refused to have, and for which it will receive no reward. "], ["Challenge is to sustain outcry against horrors", "December 28, 2012", "0", " It's almost impossible to look past the brutal gang rape of a young medical student in Delhi that has triggered such vociferous protest. But if you can do it, what you'll see is positively ghastly.You might want to look away now. A two-year-old girl, her hands and legs tied, is brutally (and we must add, allegedly) raped in the Indian city of Halol. She's taken to hospital, already in a critical condition. The force of the attack has done severe damage to her genitals. Soon she becomes infected, and is diagnosed with septicaemia. It's a horrific condition, the kind that causes you to lose limbs. She's not so lucky. In a matter of days the baby girl is dead. On Christmas Day, her body is delivered to her father.''No one seems to be bothered about my two-year-old girl,'' he says. ''No one from the government or even district administration has bothered to pay us a visit even once.''Among the countless protesters in India are parents like him. They are not protesting a gang rape. They are protesting their own cases, which go unremarked upon, the perpetrators unpunished. This is a collective scream of anguish and frustration at an elite that has refused to understand the crimes against them. ''They are our rulers, not representatives'' chant the protesters.They are talking about people such as the police commissioner, who argued men were unsafe in Delhi because ''their pockets were picked''. Or his officers, some of whom have been known to harass people for associating with ''loose women'', and treat women complaining of sexual assault with disdain. And they are talking about an overarching social attitude that stigmatises the victim, rather than the attacker.That's not uniquely an Indian problem. Swaziland has just passed a law banning miniskirts on the basis that they ''encourage rape''. Until 2006, Pakistan had a law that treated unproven allegations of rape as admissions of adultery. And it's a persistent (if more subtle) problem in societies like ours, where courts have interrogated rape victims on the skimpiness of their clothes, and the Jill Meagher tragedy inspired its own round of victim blaming. Even with our tiny population, one Australian woman is killed every week in an act of violence. There's a sexual assault in the US every two minutes.The most central misogynist flaw here is to present rape as primarily sexual - as a kind of aggravated sex - rather than as primarily violent. That obscures the fact that rape is an expression of domination and dehumanisation. Such mischaracterisations of rape are easily critiqued, but there's a bigger theme that drives them: the preservation of power and privilege.Sexualised understandings of rape come overwhelmingly from men with cultural or political authority. That is, they come from the very people they exonerate. That's what being disempowered is about. It's being denied the means even to describe the problems you face. Whether it's women in India, or asylum seekers in Australia, their problems are defined for them, complete with solutions that aren't in their interests. That's why the rich define class war as the envy of the working class, rather than the dominance of the ruling class. Problems are defined to suit the existing power structure and allow it to avoid accountability.These Indian rape protests represent so much more than the fight for women's rights. This is the voice of the disempowered, challenging the elite for the right to define their own existence. That is not new. But something here is, and it seems to be happening more and more: the ability of an emerging, socially connected middle class to undermine authority figures that were once unassailable - fast. It's possible to describe 2012 as the year the mighty were brought back to earth.Locally we've seen the Catholic Church dragged into the centre of a royal commission on child sex abuse that it has been avoiding for years, and that until just a couple months ago both major parties opposed. We've seen Alan Jones lose advertisers and cultural power to the point that politicians thought it in their interests to be seen as his enemy. Internationally, we've seen Rupert Murdoch literally placed in the dock, and the National Rifle Association look ridiculous by responding to recent shooting with a statement that failed to understand the ways in which the gun control debate in the US is leaving it behind.Now, several Indian states are pledging to revisit rape laws and retrain their police force. There are talks of special sexual crimes courts and calls for mandatory women's involvement in them. And like the cases cited above, this is responding to an irresistible popular groundswell that appeared almost instantly.Such groundswells, often accelerated by social media, aren't always inspiring. Recall the Innocence of Muslims riots that spread even to Sydney. The Indian protests have also turned violent, with one policeman killed, and the frequent calls for the death penalty are sobering, if predictable. Regardless, for better or worse, the potential for rapid social change looks very real. "], ["Rhetoric of Tony Abbott and Tony Blair is morally bereft", "October 30, 2015", "628", " There's something about seeing a former prime minister attempting to defend or rehabilitate a legacy. Something about the relentless grinding out of well-rehearsed arguments in the hope that this time they will finally strike the audience, like some revelatory lightning bolt. But the result is so often perverse; every re-statement, every elaboration seems only to heighten the sense of parody, revealing anew why there's a legacy in need of rehabilitation.It's a spectacle we've witnessed twice this week in the forms of Tony Blair and Tony Abbott. To be sure, there are differences. Blair's intervention took the form of an apology; Abbott's a kind of unapology. Blair is apparently pre-empting the impending result of an almost certainly damning inquiry; Abbott is tending to his fresh wounds for his own reasons, rather than because of some urgent external demand. But at bottom, both men carry an albatross: in Blair's case a catastrophic foreign policy blunder, and in Abbott's case a thoroughgoing political failure.\"I can say that I apologise for the fact that the intelligence we received was wrong,\" began Blair when asked – again – about his decision to invade Iraq. Immediately he revealed what sort of an apology this wasn't, apologising for the most passive thing imaginable: receiving something. \"Sorry, MI6 stuffed up\", is the most direct translation.Elsewhere, he admitted to \"mistakes in planning and, certainly, our mistake in our understanding of what would happen once you removed the regime\". But even so, he remained resolutely unapologetic for \"removing Saddam\" on the basis that \"today, in 2015, it is better that he's not there than that he is there\". All of which raises the question: why, then, are you apologising?These \"mistakes\" and \"misunderstandings\" are doing an awesome amount of heavy lifting here. To begin with, they're lifting the hundreds of thousands of bodies that belong to dead Iraqi civilians and, of course, coalition soldiers. They're also lifting the burden of IS (which Blair accepts is, at least in part, a creation of the Iraq invasion) and the increased regional influence of Iran. Frankly, it's a hell of a whoopsie. Too big, really, to explain how such a momentous decision was made on such inadequate intelligence, and certainly too big to explain how so much expert advice to the contrary was so gleefully ignored.But a whoopsie it simply must be because it's the only way Blair can keep any semblance of his legacy intact. The alternative is to admit the more grotesque allegations against him: that he either lied or manipulated his way into a predictably disastrous war, sacrificing countless lives in the process (literally – we refuse to count them). So, to admit to certain well-intentioned mistakes, and apologise for the failures of other people, is really to change the subject. Blair's aim here is not to come clean, but to wash away the intractable moral questions that will forever plague him.Abbott's Margaret Thatcher Lecture seems to present an opposite problem. In spruiking his asylum seekers policies to the world, he's not rehashing a losing argument, but perhaps his only winning one. And yet Abbott's speech, by taking those policies beyond the parochial outpost of Australia and thrusting them before Europe, seems only to have exposed their limitations.\"The only way to dissuade people seeking to come from afar is not to let them in,\" he declared as thousands fleeing the civil war in Syria flood into Europe. Anything less than turning boats around would make Europe \"a facilitator rather than a deterrent\" of people smuggling.But there's a reason this argument, which is utterly mainstream in Australia, tends only to win fans like UKIP's Nigel Farage in Britain. What it offers is not a solution at all, but instead a determination to opt out of a solution. That much becomes clear when you think through the implications of Abbott's prescription.European turnbacks could only mean millions of people piling up in places like Lebanon and Turkey. Indeed, the basis of Abbott's argument is that these people reach Europe via other countries to which they've already fled, and are therefore, by definition, economic migrants rather than refugees fleeing a war zone.But unless Abbott wants to argue explicitly that the burden of the Syrian catastrophe must fall disproportionately on these countries, they remain just as sovereign as us, and can therefore assert a right to seal their own borders, too In fact, every nation can make a similar claim, leaving only one ultimate consequence: that those fleeing Syria are hemmed right back into the war zone they're fleeing.That makes the ultimate mockery of any \"deaths at sea\" reasoning. But it also raises one of the most ignored questions in the asylum-seeker drama: why should the weight of refugee protection be carried by those nations least equipped to handle it? How is it a moral result that Lebanon takes something equivalent to a quarter of its population, while Australia congratulates itself for taking 12,000 people? How is it \"heroic\" (to borrow Farage's assessment) to advocate that instead of nations like ours doing something more proportionate, Europe simply lock its gates and let the human debris fall where it may?The answer lies somewhere in Abbott's warning of a \"tide of humanity surging through Europe and quite possibly changing it forever\". Whether such numbers will change, say, Turkey in a similar way is unanswered and, it seems, irrelevant. And if that's so, we're left with the clear implication that only Europe (and, I suppose, Australia) is worthy of such preservation.That's the kind of conclusion you tend to reach when your response is really to shift the problem elsewhere. And that kind of reasoning seems solid on an island like ours with a political culture that mostly ignores arcane matters like foreign affairs.But it's also the kind of conclusion you reach when, deep down, the actual lives of people in far off lands barely feature in your moral calculus. And that way lies just about every transgression for which you'll never feel any need to apologise. Even, say, the most scantily justified war. "], ["Doctors' protest over asylum seekers shows us what real morality is all about", "October 15, 2015", "186", " It's easy to forget there was a time that we didn't justify our asylum seeker policies by claiming they were \"stopping deaths at sea\". Once upon the Howard era, we were candid enough to say flat out it was a bald assertion of sovereignty, bolstered by a general hunch we didn't really like these people very much. That's what the whole \"children overboard\" thing was about, really: one final overstatement in a relentlessly prosecuted argument that boat people weren't really people at all. Hence: queue jumpers, possibly terrorists, the kind of unscrupulous cynics who'd drop their own kids in the ocean if it helped them cheat their way in.Viewed through that history we can see just how remarkable the transformation has been. \"Deaths at sea\" allowed us to take a crassly nationalistic argument and turn it instead into a moral one. The odd \"economic refugees\" or \"Christians only\" snipe aside, we stopped attacking refugees directly and attacked people smugglers instead. Brutality was transformed into a kind of muscular compassion, and every confirmation of the psychological (and sometimes physical) destruction of people under our jurisdiction was rendered a sober necessity. Deterrence, no matter what horrors it entailed, became the only moral position. That, insisted Malcolm Turnbull this week, is \"the melancholy truth\".And it is precisely this that makes the current refusal of doctors at Melbourne's Royal Children's Hospital to discharge their asylum-seeker patients if they are to be returned to immigration detention so potent. In a debate that is so constant and repetitive it has become mere auditory wallpaper, theirs is the most disruptive intervention in years. And that's because it is so explicitly not political. This is ostensibly a clinical decision: doctors insisting detention would further damage those under their care, and who are therefore bound not to subject them to it. But beneath every clinical judgment lies an ethical one, too. That's why doctors swear oaths. Medicine is more than a technocratic application of treatments; it is the practice of an ethos of service and care. When doctors declare they cannot return patients to immigration detention, they are saying it would be immoral for them to do so: a violation of their covenant.Government policy cannot simply trump such oaths. It cannot erase the age-old ethical foundations of an entire profession. And that is why the doctors' stance is so impervious to the predictable retorts of politics. No amount of invoking \"deaths at sea\" can compel a doctor to harm her patient. We're witnessing two contrasting moral languages here that proceed from different assumptions of what constitutes the good. And there's a lot we can learn from identifying those differences.The doctors' moral focus is on the individual patient. They do not ask, for example, whether that patient is worthy of treatment. They don't give less care to an abusive drunkard than to an altruistic social worker. They don't refuse to treat an elderly patient simply because it might be more productive to prioritise treating younger people with their prime decades still in front of them. They reject any notion that a \"lesser\" person should be sacrificed for the benefit of someone – or something – \"greater\". Their morality is about the unquestioned dignity of the person before them; a dignity that exists for no reason other than that this is a human being in need of care. In this sense it has clear liberal (or perhaps personalist) overtones. And for that reason, it is far from niche. This idea – that each individual is sacred; that no individual can simply be sacrificed in order save others – lies at the heart of our civilisation. It's the reason we've prohibited torture. It's why we've abandoned the death penalty in this country, no matter the crime. Indeed, it's the basis of the whole idea of human rights, which this nation was so instrumental in distilling into law. It's meant to be the basis on which we do our public reasoning. So it's hugely significant that right now, it's also the opposite of the argument our politicians are running. \"Deaths at sea\" only masks the nature of the morality we're adopting here. So let's be clear what it ultimately means: that we sacrifice some people for the sake of others. That individual people will be brutalised and occasionally destroyed, so that others' lives may be saved. I cannot claim there's no moral case to be made to that effect at all (although I doubt the claim there is simply no other way to save these lives). It's just that it is a starkly utilitarian one: greatest good for the greatest number, and all that.That might be fine if it's a moral vision we habitually adopt, but it's not. We don't, say, force people to donate their organs, even though we know this would save lives. As a nation we've typically rejected this sort of approach because it has a nasty habit of being unprincipled. It's the morality that can make anything from slavery, to torture, to Stalinism possible: an ethos that has no rules, only results; where nothing has intrinsic value except whatever \"greater good\" you wish to serve. Under this sort of cover, almost any atrocity can be sanctified. And if it can do even that sort of heavy lifting, then what's the mental disintegration of a few hundred asylum seekers – whether they're children or not?That's how we've reached the point where we no longer even need to pretend our detention centres are anything other than (in Patrick McGorry's phrase) \"factories for producing mental illness\". We've developed a morality that can absorb that. We just can't recognise how dramatic that is because our political debate is incapable of teasing out the moral assumptions that made that possible. But every now and then something happens that reveals the smallness of politics. Perhaps we shouldn't be altogether surprised that this time it was the stand of a few Melbourne doctors. After all, they clearly understand the ethics on which their profession is based. And their clarity leaves us with the question of whether the rest of us can make anything like the same claim.  "], ["Malcolm Turnbull’s first task: soothe the angry beast in the Liberal Party", "September 18, 2015", "362", " There's every chance you haven't heard of Zed Seselja. For the record, he's the Liberal senator for the ACT who this week warned his new boss, Malcolm Turnbull, that the Liberal Party is \"a predominantly conservative party\", and that this must be reflected in his first ministry. This, quite pointedly, sits at odds with Turnbull's own promise in the immediate afterglow of victory to lead a \"thoroughly liberal government\".It is true that with Turnbull's ascent we might be witnessing the rescue of this Coalition government's political fortunes. But we're also now seeing its first civil war. Turnbull's success depends on how bloody that conflict becomes and how many wounds he suffers, and not on anything Labor can muster. The early signs aren't great. Slowly, we're learning of the continuing anger towards Christopher Pyne, Julie Bishop and even Scott Morrison over their abandonment of Tony Abbott. We're discovering Cory Bernardi's remarkable flirtation with leaving the Liberal Party altogether, perhaps with a view to establishing his own neo-Hansonite operation.Then there are the incandescent interventions of Alan Jones types that agitate the kind of base Bernardi might pilfer. Part of this undoubtedly stems from a deeply held hatred of Turnbull – of his broadly liberal politics and his swift dismissal of their obsessions, such as climate-change denial. Part of it is the visceral contest for a great party's soul.But perhaps, most seriously, this is the desperate gasp of a certain politics in crisis, demonstrably failing and on the brink of redundancy.Abbott's demise represents not merely the fall of a politician, but of a world view.Who will represent Australian neo-conservatives now? Those expressing such concerns overlook the most important fact – that it is these people who have had the keys to the kingdom for the past two years, only to see the palace crash down around them. . It is hard to imagine a government that could better approximate the values espoused by Sydney shock jock Ray Hadley. And yet in less than 18 months it faced a leadership spill, reflecting its status as the most rapidly despised government in memory – even when confronted by a limp opposition.In this time it has been the mainstream that has gone unrepresented, while the government went on niche excursions into battle with, say, renewable energy.That, largely, is why Turnbull is popular. He seems to grasp the broad sense of what the centre wants, and has the ability to talk about it.That is only true because Australia is a rapidly transforming society. The centre now is simply not where it was in the John Howard era. Sure, Abbott lacked Howard's subtlety and grasp of middle Australia. But Abbott also governed a different country, one whose cultural politics had become effortlessly more cosmopolitan and liberal.We see this in the easy acceptance of something like same-sex marriage, which was positively, radically unthinkable in Howard's time.This means Howard's mix of neo-liberal economics and nationalist cultural politics no longer works. In the aftermath of 9/11 and the ructions of Pauline Hanson, you could pretend that the world was being ruined by politically correct elites, the ABC, multiculturalism, greenies, and migrants who refuse to integrate.Howard famously predicted the times would suit him, and they did. But those times began to end around 2006 and have only receded further into history. Nowadays that sort of argument sounds like an artefact. What once was populist has slowly become marginal – the kind of thing you'd go to a Reclaim Australia rally to hear.Unfortunately for Abbott, if he went to such a rally he'd have found one of his own MPs speaking at it. And he'd have no answer to this because it is on such fringes that he and his cheerleaders increasingly found themselves.They would dispute this, of course. Hence the continued misdiagnoses of the problem, from the constant references to a \"feral\" Senate right down to Abbott's final prime ministerial moments in which he blamed a febrile media for his plight.He's not completely wrong, to be fair. Our public culture surely has become as abrasive as it has become shallow. But it is not this that did for Abbott, so much as his disastrous first budget and its manifestly unfair distribution of pain; his mass of contradictory (and accordingly broken) promises; his campaign on racial vilification laws; his economically backward-looking love of coal; and symbolically backward-looking knighting of Prince Philip.From there, every move he made, particularly in a neo-conservative direction, alienated and occasionally offended the electorate, reinforcing the perception he was not merely idiosyncratic, but belligerently so.Every politics runs its course until its moment of crisis. For Labor it was in the aftermath of the Hawke/Keating reforms when the new consensus on liberal economics buried the Labor Party's reason for existence – a reason it has not yet rediscovered. Now it is neo-conservatism's turn.Left unchecked as it has been in Britain and New Zealand, this eventually takes the form of Donald Trump, offering nothing more than the celebration of naked prejudice as some kind of virtue. It will have its moments of frenzy, but not its lasting victories, and certainly not any proud legacy.Australia is a long way from there. The Liberal Party is not yet overrun. But even so, it is deeply unrepresentative. Turnbull is its most representative figure, and for that very reason is perhaps its most internally despised.His task is to narrow that gap; to make his party mainstream and electable. And perhaps that is not beyond him. Unlike Labor, the Liberal Party loves success and tends to mould itself to the personality of its leader. But he'll want to succeed because if he can't drag this government somewhere central, this government could well drag him into oblivion. "], ["Dyson Heydon: the pub test is a tool in the politics of cynicism", "September 4, 2015", "200", " Can we just kill the pub test? Can we banish it from whatever this thing is that masquerades as political debate? For starters, it's never clear what kind of pub we're talking about. One of those groovy inner-city ones populated by kale-fuelled hipsters? One of those (increasingly rare) suburban ones that swallowed a bistro back in the '80s and is now kept afloat by pokies? One of those pillar-of-the-community ones in the country, across the road from the church and the footy ground?It kind of matters because each of these captures different social sets, with different worldly concerns and different levels of interest in politics. That's why I have this sneaky feeling the people who talk about the \"pub test\" are usually people who never actually go to pubs unless there's some magnetic photo opportunity pulling them there.This week, that apparently includes lots of people aghast that Dyson Heydon absolved himself of apprehended bias in his role running the Royal Commission into Trade Union Governance and Corruption.Indeed, it has become a concerted line of attack. Here's Adam Bandt: \"Agreeing to attend a Liberal fundraiser doesn't pass the pub test. The commissioner deciding himself that he's not biased won't change that\". Or the ACTU's Dave Oliver who declared the whole episode wouldn't be accepted by \"too many people now in the pub … or out in the street\".OK, fine. But so what? When Heydon was ruling on apprehensions of his own bias, he was answering a legal question. He was parsing lots of quite technical legal principles and applying the facts in this case to them. And here's the thing: when it comes to developing and applying the legal principles that govern the administration of justice, I frankly don't want that done in pubs. I think we can do better than some version of trial by talkback. I'm content to let such things be determined by the accumulated jurisprudential wisdom of centuries. I'm happy for judges to stand apart from the bar-room banter, rather than be besieged by it.Sure, the law has its flaws, and judicial processes occasionally fail. It was, after all, a court that so egregiously convicted Lindy Chamberlain. But show me a single pub in Australia that wouldn't have done the same, and then cheerfully gone on to repeat similar injustices in scores of other cases.This isn't a mere question of semantics. Let's be clear about this: when Bandt or Oliver appeal to pub sensibilities to suggest it is some obvious howler that Heydon would hear an application against himself, they are in fact attacking the normal operation of the legal system. In making his judgment, Heydon was acting as countless judges have for countless years. As you read this right now, there's a fair chance a judge somewhere in Australia is doing the same in a very important case involving lots of money or the fate of some children after a divorce.Sure, there are critiques of this process, but if we're going to make them, let's own up to what that means: a thoroughgoing legal reform that has nothing particularly to do with Heydon. Let us declare this long-established feature of our legal system unacceptable, outline what legal changes we would make, and demonstrate why they are necessary. Otherwise, we're left with what the \"pub test\" always is: a crafted, folksy, political talking point deployed for political convenience.Perhaps, then, we should simply dismiss it as a rhetorical flourish. And I would if this were an isolated case. But it's not. In fact it's becoming a touchstone of our political conversation. It was applied to Bill Shorten when he fronted the same royal commission to explain some apparently suspicious payments his union received from companies years ago. It was applied – with a little help from Joe Hockey – to Bronwyn Bishop's surreal chopper excursion, and then to every story of a politician's family flying business class. Alan Jones used it to savage the Abbott government's free trade agreement with China. Try it: punch a politician's name into Google along with \"pub test\".What, exactly, is being denoted here? The kindest answer would be some sense of \"real\" politics as understood by \"real\" people, rather than the insincere, manufactured stuff offered by professional politicians. There's a certain nobility to this idea – a sense that politics should include the ordinary among us and not merely be the preserve of a self-serving, self-referential elite.But there's an illusion to it, too. Because just as the pub is no longer a single coherent idea, neither are real people. All real people can quickly be broken down into far narrower, less real subsets: greenies, rednecks, lefties, bogans, oldies, suits – we're all in one bubble or another, each of which is out of touch with everyone else. Anyone who says otherwise is a well-to-do, inner-city media editor pretending desperately to speak on behalf of middle Australia.But more likely – and especially where boring technical issues are concerned, like in Heydon's case – it denotes something worse. The patron that we would have standing in judgment of Heydon is not gathering all the available facts, poring over the evidence and then trying to form the most discerning possible view. They're riffing, really, probably on the basis of a news item or two.And law-reform debates aside, that's my fear: that \"pub test\" has simply become a shorthand for impressionistic politics – a politics of the gut. This is a politics of quick opinion, unconcerned with details or abstract principles. I don't deny such politics exist. I don't even argue they shouldn't. But there are surely times when appealing to this is just too cynical; when it subverts a process that is specifically meant to be independent of pub politics.I think this is one of them. Not because Heydon's perceived impartiality is beyond any reasonable challenge. For what it's worth, I have my doubts about parts of his decision simply denying the relevant function was a fundraiser. And I suspect he too easily dismissed the clearly political dynamics driving this royal commission.But, frankly, my doubts aren't worth a coaster. If the unions are as scandalised as they say, I'd encourage them to head to court immediately and mount a challenge. I'd like to see them chance their arm outside the pub. Because I'd hate to think they're content to let Heydon's decision stand so they can play it for politics. "], ["Abbott is losing the plot in his war on environmentalists", "August 21, 2015", "715", " Few things seem to rile the Abbott government quite as much as isolated Federal Court decisions. You'll recall that before this whole Carmichael coal mine episode there was Andrew Bolt's section 18C affair. Tony Abbott was in opposition in that case, but this difference aside, the similarities are striking.In both cases, the good guys lost. In both cases, they were the victims of pesky activist types. And in both cases the laws in question had been in force for some 15 or so years, having barely been used with any success.And yet, in both cases, the Coalition's response has been to declare – on the basis of little more than one result it didn't like – that the laws in question were wreaking some manner of tyrannical havoc and had to be junked. If that strikes you as a little rash, the section 18C experience supports your hunch.Somehow the Abbott government convinced itself that its sense of outrage was a mainstream one: that the electorate would fete it as the heroic protector of an imperilled free speech, and some dangerously fading right to bigotry. Soon enough it became clear the public saw no such scandal, that it was the government's position that was on the margins, and that its 18C proposals would be forced to retreat to the shelves of political abandonment.But the fuming over Adani​'s Carmichael troubles might be even more rash. The laws in question are John Howard's. The idea that environmental groups can test governmental decisions in court is a markedly uncontroversial one because it recognises that environmental damage affects the whole country and cannot be confined merely to local landowners; and that if environmental protection is left only to individual locals, no meaningful environmental protection will take place.Sure, there's some chance such laws could be abused. Which is why the public service did a thorough review on how they've been working. Turns out they're working fine. \"These provisions have created no difficulties and should be maintained,\" it concluded. \"The question is whether these provisions should be expanded further.\" Hence, from 5500 projects, the laws have been used 33 times. Successfully, twice. That's a success rate of 0.04 per cent. Rounded up.Now, consider the government's language. It talks of \"vigilante litigation\", \"endless legal sabotage\", \"bullies in the green movement\" and an environmentalist \"war against economic development\". It is, of course gigantically hyperbolic. In the case of \"vigilante litigation\" it is literally nonsensical – like \"gluttonous starvation\" or \"rapid-fire sluggishness\". But it's also visceral in a way that is instructive. It suggests this is something more than garden variety politicking. There's a genuine, long-standing disdain here that has much to tell us about the current state of ostensibly conservative party politics.Much like section 18C, the Carmichael mine case taps into a much greater political mythology. These are not, in the Coalition's view, isolated cases at all. Rather, they are symbols of a more fundamental, thoroughgoing onslaught. Whether it be racial and ethnic minorities, or environmentalists, all are taken to be special interests whose claims threaten the liberal order of things. To resist these forces is therefore not to fix some mere technical flaw in this or that legislation. It is to defend the barricades against the evils of an unchecked collectivism that sits in direct contrast to our established capitalist ethos.That's why the Abbott government so consistently posits the environment and the economy as opposites, even as the governments of America, Britain, New Zealand, and (broadly) Europe, don't. For Abbott, the environment matters, but not at the expense of the economy, to which it is subordinate. Carbon pricing only ever costs jobs, rather than creates them. And, of course, environmental protection laws can only ever be \"green tape\": a regulatory yoke around the neck of business, and not a means of protecting valuable assets that return economic benefits in the long term.Implicit here: environmentalists, and environmentalism, are simply not to be trusted. Their very motives must be suspect. So, it's \"war\" and \"sabotage\" and \"bullying\" and nothing more genuine than that.The \"new religion\" of the \"extreme left\" is how former Coalition senator Nick Minchin put it: the cloak that masks its real agenda to \"deindustralise the Western world\". Environmentalism, then, becomes the new communism, designed to implement vast new bureaucracies that control the free market and implement the will of the unelected.You can see the ideological residue of the Cold War, here. And on one level, that makes sense. That was an era from which notionally conservative parties emerged ideologically triumphant, and in which the world accordingly made perfect sense. But as the Abbott government's woes suggest, things aren't so triumphant now. That world that made so much sense makes appreciably less sense now.Some conservative parties, such as the Tories in Britain, have made the ideological adjustment, embracing at least the idea of a conservative environmentalism. But in Australia, as for the Republicans in America, such adjustments are scant. We're apparently fixed on the same binaries even as we're faced with a world that increasingly defies them.That's why the government is compelled to overstate everything, from the amount of investment Adani is promising to the number of jobs the project is meant to create, to the scale of environmentalists' \"very well orchestrated and highly funded campaign\". It's why the issue must become the very idea of the law that requires a thorough environmental examination, rather than the government's failure in this case to follow it.And it's why the government, having swept to power opposing a carbon tax, somehow finds itself increasingly at odds with the electorate on renewable energy and, to a lesser extent, climate change. It seems determined to see environmentalist concerns as fringe and radical; as a valid object of war. But war has its osmosis. If you're not careful, you eventually become the very thing you thought you were fighting. "], ["Tony Abbott has been further isolated by his Indigenous backdown", "August 6, 2015", "197", " It is a rare day you receive a letter from your own \"prophet\". And it is surely a rarer one when you reject it. But that's what happened this week when Tony Abbott rebuffed Noel Pearson's suggestion that the path to Indigenous constitutional recognition goes through Indigenous Australians.It's a simple idea, really: you can't come up with a form of recognition that will mean anything to Indigenous people until they have figured out exactly what that is themselves. The government needs to afford them the chance to thrash this out without the rest of us being in the room. So, Indigenous-only conferences – this is the kind of consultation Indigenous Australia is crying out for, and which is routinely denied.So it was again. \"Madness\", cried Pearson upon learning of the Prime Minister's rejection. Usually it's the prophet who wears such labels from a disbelieving public. So something is terribly amiss when he's flinging it at his disciple. And it's a madness made all the more befuddling when you consider Pearson developed this proposal with Patrick Dodson: two men who over decades have occupied distant poles within Indigenous affairs.There's Dodson the frequently revered elder, and Pearson the anti-welfare, free-marketeering lawyer, beloved of successive Coalition prime ministers. That they stand unified with a clear request on behalf of a people who exhibit the fractiousness so common among minority groups says this must be impossibly obvious. And yet. \"It jars with the notion of finally substituting 'we' for 'us and them',\" declared Abbott.  \"It might produce something akin to a log of claims\". If Pearson is offended – and he said as much this week – it's because the theme is about as old as it gets. It's the vision of an Indigenous Australia relentlessly making demands, seeking  rights the rest of us don't want to bear; an Indigenous Australia that can't be trusted to be consulted properly because it \"will go completely feral\", in Pearson's exasperated phrase. It's the logic that insists we are all simply citizens: individuals, the same and undifferentiated. This is a kind of pious liberalism that rigorously ignores entrenched disadvantage; the same one that is implicitly why John Howard refused what became Kevin Rudd's famous apology, and is explicitly why he rejected any suggestion of a treaty. The trouble is, it sits entirely at odds with the whole project of Indigenous recognition: a project Abbott has promised to \"sweat blood\" to achieve.What went wrong? The least charitable answer would be: nothing; that this is simply the logical extension of Abbott's entrenched world view. And maybe that's true. But it's also true that Abbott is rare among our politicians – and certainly our prime ministers – in his level of exposure to Indigenous Australia.Clearly, even by the testimony of the most sympathetic Indigenous leaders, he is failing on promise to be \"a prime minister for Indigenous affairs\": a failure written in harsh budget cuts to essential services and a seminal contribution to the possible forced closure of remote communities, even before you factor in a stalled recognition campaign.  But there's something in the fact that he thought to make the promise in the first place. A promise, after all, that would have earned him no points from his political base and could hardly have helped him on election day. Particularly when you consider how the 2013 Indigenous vote fled from him.I doubt Abbott would make such a promise now; it's just so at odds with the mode in which he's governing, which seems almost entirely directed at a different cause. Join the dots between his strange campaign against an extremely popular renewable energy industry, his slowly cooling war with the ABC and now this, and the image emerges of a prime minister governing for the farthest reaches of his own party.All these issues are ones in which Abbott finds himself almost determinedly outside the mainstream. The polling is clear. Even Coalition voters love renewable energy and trust the ABC. And if your approach to Indigenous affairs offends the very Indigenous voice who effectively wrote your pre-election policies, there is scarcely anyone left in Indigenous Australia on whose behalf you are governing.In this sense, the constitutional recognition campaign may be among the collateral damage of February's near-death experience. The 39 votes cast that day for no one, but against Abbott, clearly wounded. The shock has subordinated him to his backbench, several of whom would pull him only further from the electorate. Thus is Abbott marooned on issues like, say, same-sex marriage, where 80 per cent of his party room is against it, and 70 per cent of the electorate for it. That neatly captures the paradox. Abbott is on a constant quest to save his leadership, and in the process can only progressively weaken it.This is meant to be the lot of Labor prime ministers, beholden to factional shoving, vulnerable to self-centred forces that have little to do with the interests of the electorate. That it is now happening to a Liberal Prime Minister is quietly enormous. It is not meant to be this way. The Liberal Party is meant to be a creature of its leader; a more freeform arrangement that coalesces around success and the authority it confers. So it has been from Menzies to Howard, with only the most incompetent exceptions.Abbott might just be the Liberal Party's first Labor prime minister: gasping for authority, unable to rely on his instincts, consumed by a narrow brand of leadership for the benefit of his family's most idiosyncratic branches. That's why there's no coherence, only a rolling series of enemy targets and aborted policy missions. It's why even natural allies such as the business community are increasingly disillusioned. And it's why the clearer it is that Abbott is leader, the harder it is to tell exactly who he's leading. "], ["Politics: the ugly game where the melee rules", "July 23, 2015", "169", " The NRL this week announced its rule changes for next season. The AFL will do that later, but for now its community is engrossed in a frenzied debate about what those changes should be. In both cases, though, the aim is clear: make it easier to score. Footballers in both codes are simply so fit, so disciplined now, they're defending too well. The game is clogged, rigid, structured. It's ugly. Fans are disillusioned. So, for example, both codes will likely reduce the number of substitutions in the hope of exhausting the players, cracking defences, and inviting a festival of tries and goals late in matches. That's a spectacle that will thrill us.What both codes know is that this cannot simply be left to the coaches. Their job is winning. It is not to make the game attractive. Every club would rather win ugly than lose pretty. And hereabouts a paradox emerges: your club's single-minded quest for success slowly erodes the game's appeal. The adversarial grammar of sport guarantees more professional performance, but not a more enjoyable product. So, at intermittent crisis points, the AFL and the NRL intervene, assuming their role as overarching custodians of the game.Politics, of course, has no equivalent of this. It is left entirely to its clubs, each of whom is similarly obsessed with the short-term pursuit of victory. In theory, an overarching concern with the good of the nation is meant to mitigate. But that requires us simply to trust our parties to subordinate themselves to this; to sacrifice cynical political opportunities for something greater. Right now, that trust seems thoroughly naive. Politics is at a point of crisis, where no short-term political opportunity can be passed up. And the end result has been the debasement of the whole endeavour of politics. The game's ugly.I could recite any number of examples to illustrate this. Like Labor's faux outrage on the fuel excise, which it irresponsibly slammed, then having extracted maximum populist mileage, quietly supported a year later. Or the Coalition's declaration that it was open to examining superannuation tax concessions, only to dismiss this altogether in a Tea Party-style rage the moment Labor dared to offer a suggestion. But such is our age that a new example is born every moment. And so, I give you Bronwyn Bishop.There's little disputing the offence here. Even Tony Abbott – a man intensely loyal to Bishop – has confirmed as much. There's also little disputing that the starring role of an indulgent chopper lends a surreal, satirical quality to the whole affair. So, too, that this is Bronnie – the woman who made a name for herself savaging others' misuse of public money. But all that said, we're not talking about high crime. In a normal world, this sort of thing is shoved off to some finance committee or other. But this is no longer a normal world. And so Labor's first instinct is to ask the federal police to get involved.That, of course, is retaliation for the sordid Peter Slipper affair. This is understandable, but it's also the point. The Abbott opposition's attack on Slipper – which resulted in criminal charges for misused cab charges that ultimately failed – was a nakedly political one. So, for that matter, was Labor's contrivance to put Slipper in the speaker's chair in the first place, handing the Gillard government an extra voting member in a hung Parliament. That was the story of a cut-throat Parliament in which the office of the speaker became a mere pawn. That is a serious erosion of a key institution of government. Bishop's continued partisanship – so strong that her greatest regret is that this saga has taken the heat off Bill Shorten – has only compounded the decline. But it is a decline that was already well in motion.We're playing politics by newly unvarnished rules now; a kind of total politics, where nothing has an existence beyond winning and losing. The disease extends even to royal commissions, like the one on pink batts, telling us nothing we didn't already know, but reminding the world of past Labor scandal. Should this become a pattern of partisan shaming of previous governments, our political culture will be truly lost.All this inevitably exacts its price in policy. Here, too, the week provides an example in Shorten's new proposed renewable energy target of 50 per cent by 2030. Bold. Ambitious. Etc. But the giveaway is Shorten's celebration of this as the \"centrepiece of our response to climate change\", promising he would refuse to buckle before \"ridiculous scare campaigns\" from the Coalition. But if Shorten means what he says, he's already buckled. The RET is not a centrepiece. It is rather a peripheral complement to the real centrepiece: an emissions trading scheme. And there's a very good reason for that: just about everyone agrees that the most efficient way to reduce carbon emissions is to use the market to do it by pricing carbon. To make the RET your centrepiece is to abandon the very idea of a market-centred approach in favour of using blunt regulation.Labor doesn't believe in that. At least, it has always said it doesn't. Its reason for making the RET central is simple: it's popular. Everyone loves renewable energy, even Coalition voters. But everyone's nervous about pricing carbon because Abbott so mercilessly slayed Labor with its carbon tax. Even now the Coalition is insisting there's no difference between a carbon tax and an emissions trading scheme (incidentally making John Howard the first prime minister to propose a carbon tax). If that's a \"ridiculous scare campaign\", then it seems very much to have intimidated Labor.It's a bizarre scene. The major parties – both of which heartily embraced free-market orthodoxy about 30 years ago – are now vying with each other to move the free market to the edges of their climate change policies. Labor's focus is apparently regulation. The Coalition has a centralised command and control policy it calls Direct Action, which sounds a bit like some radical socialist group that handed you pamphlets on campus. This is not the result of a policy debate. It's the accumulated effect of a series of small, short-term political manoeuvres that have left us with nowhere else to go; a steady stream of wins and losses being chalked on a board somewhere at club headquarters. Meanwhile, no one seems to care much for the state of the game. And hereabouts we learn politics and football aren't quite identical. Politics has no custodians. Apparently it is nowhere near as important. "], ["Politics is about persuasion but both parties neglect the public's views", "July 10, 2015", "203", " About the same time Barnaby Joyce was not appearing on Q&A, Australians were largely not digesting an opinion poll from that morning that made diabolical reading. Most simply, it was diabolical for our major political leaders, both of whom are plumbing historic depths of unpopularity and disapproval.More broadly, though, this whole snapshot is diabolical for the very idea of Australian political culture. Our disillusionment with politics is now complete. It is real. It is not mere nostalgia for a better time that never existed. It is a kind of socialised disgust at the cynical offering with which voters are now stuck. Joyce's forced boycott (and now, Malcolm Turnbull's) partly explains this nadir.Not because democracy cannot function without Q&A, or even that Q&A cannot function without the Coalition. But because a cabinet boycott of this kind symbolises the state of civil debate in this country; a debate now so thoroughly decomposed it barely resembles its origins as the central pillar of democracy. This saga stands as an emblem for the way in which we do public discourse.Both major parties contribute to this mess, though in opposite ways. The Coalition pursues niche convictions that have little to do with public sentiment; Labor pursues public sentiment but with little conviction. What neither do is engage us on contentious matters of importance, and mount a coherent, sustained argument. They will try to outrage us – preferably directing that rage towards their foes. They will try to assuage us. But they almost never try to persuade us.To be sure, each party has its populist terrain, on which it naturally embodies public instincts. The Coalition has national security and boats. Labor has anything that can be dubbed \"fairness\" and (if the Coalition dares raise it) industrial relations. But so ingrained are our uninspiring habits that even on these issues there is nothing approximating leadership.Labor's best moments arrive when the Coalition steps on a landmine and offends the electorate. From here, Labor simply amplifies the damage. It does not start these conversations and take the country with it. It waits for the country to declare its outrage, then rides it. So it was with the Abbott government's disastrous first budget, as it was with WorkChoices before it. Where other issues fall its way – like say climate change or even same-sex marriage – it simply mangles the argument.It is Labor – through Kevin Rudd's ETS cowardice and Julia Gillard's \"citizens' assembly\" policy void, which led her ultimately to break her promise by negotiating a carbon tax she had specifically ruled out – that has made a serious climate change policy politically impossible. And when it does mount a visionary idea – like, say, Gonski – it fails to explain why these ideas are more important than the debt they will impose, leaving them susceptible to a fiscal dismantling.The Coalition, meanwhile, finds itself unable to resist overdoing its advantages. Tony Abbott's recently belligerent focus on national security has lacked any of John Howard's subtlety, and delivered no discernible benefit in the polls. He's pursued this so wildly that his most high-profile cabinet colleague – and greatest internal threat as leader – now feels comfortable building his capital by being more measured on terrorism. Abbott may be the first leader to have found a way to exhaust the political advantages of national security, which is no piffling achievement. The same is probably not quite true of asylum seeker policy, but the problem with boats is that once they stop coming, Australians stop fearing them, meaning their political bang has a natural limit. Unless, of course, the issue can be somehow revived.That thought petrifies Labor, which is precisely why Bill Shorten will be dreading its upcoming national conference, where Labor's factions will tear at each other's throats over whether or not to support Abbott's policy of turning back boats. A significant portion of the party would find this scandalous, but Shorten knows that if he fails to adopt it, the Coalition will hammer its political advantage mercilessly. And that's why he's manoeuvring to capitulate. It's a study of how Labor behaves on issues where public sentiment runs against it.If Labor struggles to press home a popular argument, it has long since abandoned hope of mounting an unpopular one – which is why it spent most of its last term pretending it could deliver a surplus. And right now, any kind of restraint on asylum seeker policy is about as unpopular as it gets. Shorten would need to counter the torrent of anti-boat people hysteria that has gripped the country since Paul Keating. That's unlikely, so we can expect Labor to acquiesce.And it is here that Labor's differences with the Coalition are sharpest. Faced with its own idiosyncrasies, the Coalition chooses neither to acquiesce, nor to persuade, but rather to bludgeon. We're seeing that from some of the Coalition's hardiest warriors on same-sex marriage and renewable energy, for example. And we're certainly seeing that with Q&A. Abbott is playing to a crowd – both within and without his party room – whose incandescent hatred of the ABC long predates Zaky Mallah's infamy.The trouble is that crowd is very small. The ABC remains vastly more popular than any government, and the broader electorate simply has no interest in seeing a Prime Minister treat it like some enemy of the state that is on the wrong \"side\". Abbott's running against public sympathies here, on an issue with almost no mainstream resonance. He's doing it with all the vigour Labor doesn't, and none of the touch someone like Howard did.These are our times. Labor refuses to prosecute a difficult argument. The Coalition cannot prosecute one without finding an enemy to prosecute along with it. But no one is inviting us into a civil exchange. Perhaps with our instant online outrage and shallowing media cycle we're not the best guests. Sure, I'll accept that. But politicians aren't merely self-interested combatants. They're custodians of our political culture. And on that score there's a problem because it's never been easier to win politically by destroying politics. "], ["Three weeks in, it's still an election about nothing in particular", "May 26, 2016", "253", " When was the last time anyone voted for anyone? Barack Obama in 2008. Maybe Kevin 07? Other than that, examples are thin on the ground. Australians didn't vote for anyone at all in 2010, voted against Labor (and certainly not for Abbott) in 2013, and have now very quickly fallen out of love with Malcolm Turnbull almost as thoroughly as we dropped Rudd. This year Americans will either vote against Donald Trump and put Hillary Clinton in the White House, or they'll vote against politics altogether and put Trump there. An average of national polls this week put Trump slightly ahead. Yes.Meanwhile, Austria came within a whisker of electing a far-right president. It's largely a ceremonial role, but it's hardly a token result. Norbert Hofer is the kind of character who has now become an utterly familiar part of the political landscape: he has obvious counterparts in Slovakia, in Hungary, in Poland, in Switzerland, in Greece, in Sweden, in the Netherlands, even in France and Britain in the forms of Marine Le Pen and Nigel Farage. Now note the ubiquitous description of these figures: anti-immigrant, anti-EU. It's a surging movement defined overwhelmingly by what it's against.But here's the kicker: Hofer didn't even lose to a usual suspect. He lost to a fellow outlier: a former Green running as an independent, who'd be considered radical by the standards of conventional politics. But that's just it. Convention has been obliterated. Austria's two major parties, even with their votes combined, would have come third in this race. They didn't even get to the second-round runoff election. If the politics of the 20th century was a battle between liberalism and socialism, it's becoming something else entirely in the 21st. The problem is that's all it's becoming: something else.Liberalism and socialism were competing, well-formed social visions. They identified grand aims, and proposed means of achieving them. They ground out theories about the role of government and the rights of the citizen. In short, they asked us to buy something positive, even if they were quite negative about each other. And in turns, they earned the approval of voting majorities.Where exactly is that majority now? Liberalism – once a defining characteristic of the right – is now crashing on the shores of right-wing populism. From Trump to Hofer, this movement is economically protectionist in a way that makes serious liberals shudder. And socialism commenced falling apart once the Cold War ended, before comprehensively doing so in the wake of the financial crisis. It depends on a shared sense of solidarity amongst its citizenry, and yet this is precisely what democracies no longer have. That's why socialism's natural supporters have abandoned it: this week a staggering 86 per cent of Austria's manual workers voted for Hofer.The truth is there are no majorities anymore. Not in any positive sense. Since the financial crisis, elites are under populist assault. But the underclass now includes everyone from white nationalist blue-collar workers to well-educated but unemployed young people, immigrants and refugees. And that's before you factor in the splintering of public debate into a million online forums, and as many completely different publics. That's not to say people cannot win elections. Clearly they must. But it is to say that the terms on which those elections can be won have narrowed drastically.Democratic politics has become so debased, so mistrusted, so fractured, that the only genuine form of currency now seems to be opposition. Much has been said about the idea that politics has now become post-ideological; that it has become about nothing much. But the truth is worse than that. We're in an age where the only way to cobble together a majority is to run against something.We're in the age of dissent. And in an age like this, power can only be grasped via some manufactured coalition of anger. That, of course, is utterly unsustainable because no sooner does that coalition succeed than it becomes the very target of the next wave of protest. It rages its way to power only to be raged out of it at the next available opportunity. That's why Abbott existed. It's why even Turnbull is now running a campaign as though he's an opposition leader. And more broadly, it's why we're now able to shed prime ministers with such effortless speed in this country.But perhaps nothing illustrates this quite so perfectly as Austria. Hofer's alarming success was the clear product of a protest vote. But ultimately, so was his failure. The eventual victor, Alexander Van der Bellen, might be the first Green in the world to be elected head of state, but he was an extremely reluctant choice. Hofer soundly beat him in the first round, and the result was only reversed once both major parties unenthusiastically backed Van der Bellen in the runoff as a lesser evil. Indeed, Van der Bellen himself argued that same case, pleading for the votes of people \"who don't like me but perhaps like Hofer even less\". And after all that, he won by just 31,000 votes.This week our own interminable election campaign has shrunk to something of remarkable smallness. We've seen all manner of ping pong over costings and black holes, and funding announcements about things like localised mobile phone dead spots. We're three weeks into this campaign and the preponderance of jobs-and-growth-style slogans aside, it's still impossible to identify what this election is really about. There are flashpoints – negative gearing, maybe some health funding, possibly even boats – but there's no central, definitive theme. This philosophical vacuum will naturally be filled by negative politicking, which is why Labor's so relentless on Turnbull's elitism and the Coalition wants to whack Shorten as weak on asylum seekers. But what if this isn't a story of uninspired campaigning? What if this is just democracy now? Maybe it's time to stop expecting anything more because in the age of dissent, we'll only punish anyone who offers it. "], ["House prices: is the ground beginning to shift at last?", "June 11, 2015", "420", " Every few years the opposition discovers the problem of housing affordability. For now, it is Labor fuming relentlessly about how \"out of touch\" Joe Hockey is for suggesting the apparent solution to soaring house prices is a better job. But Hockey was once in opposition himself, and back then he threw similar barbs. \"(Treasurer Wayne) Swan must explain why housing is more (affordable) when Melb prices rose 20% last yr\", he tweeted in 2010. \"The biggest challenge is housing affordability over the next few years\", he reiterated a few months later, on the eve of an election. He was right, of course. Even if he now disagrees with himself.That's the cycle. Oppositions thunder about house prices, form government, watch it get worse, then go back to opposition, where they thunder all over again. Rudd did it to Howard. Abbott did it to Rudd and Gillard. Now Shorten is doing it to Abbott. There's a reason it's like this: behind all the heat, anger and politicking, we've had a raging consensus on policy that dramatically privileges the interests of those who own property over those who don't.  It has been this way for at least 15 years, and it's the product of a worldview that means the only solutions you can find are the kind Hockey has offered. Yes, this was a gaffe. But let's be clear: Hockey's was a crime of politics, and if you're the Labor Party, not of policy. The bare fact is that housing is unaffordable because the market is flooded with investors.  Fewer than half of our houses are owned by people living in them. About 30 years ago that figure was around 85 per cent. And if we're honest, that's exactly what both parties have been aiming for, given the way our tax system works.  If you're a high-income earner, you have a choice: you can either pay half your earnings in tax, or, thanks to concessions on things like negative gearing and capital gains tax, you can put it into property and pay about a quarter. The result, put crudely, is rich people buying houses they don't particularly want, but which poorer people want to live in. Naturally, the wealthy can afford to pay a bit more for them, so the price goes up. And since both sides of politics are determined to make sure house prices keep going up, investors take minimal risk and first-home seekers have increasingly minimal hope.But think about what this worldview is telling you. It says work is worth less than investment, which is why it's taxed higher. And that, of course, is an option only open to the fortunate. That is the true significance of Hockey's words. They merely disclose the assumption on which this bipartisan system is based: that all this could be yours, if only you try hard enough.  It's a myth, of course. Indeed, there are several reasons Hockey's claims collapse. First, that if everyone could somehow heed his advice and get a well-salaried job, that would simply swamp the housing market with cash, driving prices up even faster and rendering our shiny new jobs suddenly and hopelessly inadequate. And second, that this is a government that just last year was fretting out \"something akin\" to a \"wages explosion\" even as our wages are growing at the slowest rate since the ABS started keeping the data. The last thing it seems to want is for us to get higher-paid jobs.But myths are inevitable when you transform the free market from an economic arrangement into a political philosophy. You wind up assuming opportunity is more or less equal, that individuals control their respective fates, and that empowering the wealthy to increase their wealth will, by some abstract mechanism, enrich us all. Thus, you pretend the market simply redistributes power and wealth according to talent and effort, and doesn't also concentrate these things among those who start with an advantage. In the case of housing, that means older people who were able to enter the market before it raced out of reach.We're apparently determined to be blind to this. Partly that's because property owners represent a seriously powerful bloc of votes, making their interests approximately sacred. But it's also because to see this would cause a consensus worldview to crumble. That's why Hockey's present solution – to increase \"supply\" by building more houses – is exactly the same as his predecessor's. It's a good idea, but it's far from complete because it can't guarantee investors wouldn't snap up these extra dwellings as well, and the current construction boom (including record numbers of residential building approvals) hasn't yet solved the problem. It dominates, though, because it's politically and ideologically painless. It is the solution that preserves our market-based dogma.It's one thing to preserve a mythology in ordinary times. But what if our times are becoming rapidly less ordinary? We're now witnessing a generation of Australians on the verge of realising they might never own a home. We've never seen that before. And with it we're witnessing the slow death of an idea: that the free-marketeer's great loves – investment and capital – do not automatically improve everyone's lot. That's why criticisms of negative gearing are working their way into mainstream conversation in a way unthinkable only a year ago. It's why the Greens this week launched a policy to wind it back, and Labor, which spent six years in power steadfastly refusing to do the same – choosing instead to roll out a suite of profoundly ineffective policies – has now said it is considering it.  The Coalition, given its own ideological convictions, will naturally be the last to rethink this. But there is something telling that an actual, fundamental difference on housing policy might be emerging as an electoral battleground. Whatever the short-term result, that's a serious shift. It can be hard to see that shift beyond the gaffes and the breathless, populist ranting that seem so familiar and occupy us so pointlessly. But it's worth looking if you can, because our politics might be being remade before our eyes. "], ["Government's call to reject Australian IS defectors an opportunity lost", "May 28, 2015", "395", " As things stand, you could murder the Queen, the Governor-General and the Prime Minister, and keep your citizenship. You'd be guilty of treason. You'd almost certainly go to prison for life. But you'd die as an incarcerated Australian, even if you had dual citizenship.Australians, you see, can be just about anything. We can be frauds, armed robbers and rapists; embezzlers, torturers and serial killers. We'll be named, shamed and imprisoned for these things, but none of them we deem sufficient to extinguish our nationality. If you're born an Australian citizen, it's damn hard to lose that.That's what is so significant about the Abbott government's policy, confirmed this week, to strip dual nationals who've joined ISIL of their Australian citizenship. It reveals that these crimes exist in a separate category, characterised not merely by their badness, but by their betrayal.That's what makes terrorism such a special case even though it kills so few Australians compared to, say, car accidents or domestic violence. Those events we characterise (however incorrectly) as private tragedies: offences against private victims. Terrorism is an offence against our public selves. The scale of its repugnance lies not in the direct damage it does, which is limited, but in the symbolic damage inherent in such a violent rejection of the collective us.That's why there's a catharsis in stripping citizenship from these people. It's a secular act of excommunication. And, just like its religious counterpart, it makes us feel better about those still in the fold. We're purifying ourselves of disbelievers. But this implicitly requires us to view terrorism in one of two ways: either as war, or as unconventional politics.The war analogy, of course, has dominated our discourse on terrorism since the September 11 attacks, and explains why it is that the only other way for a dual national to lose an Australian citizenship acquired at birth is to serve in the armed forces of a country fighting ours. But hereabouts we run into problems. First, that if the post-9/11 era has taught us anything, it is that treating terrorism as war has been a ghastly failure. It has only compounded the disaster and amplified the problem to the extent we now consider a terrorist attack on home soil more likely than at any other time in our history.But secondly – and more intriguingly – this approach is increasingly at odds with the way governments and security organisations are talking about terrorism. This is the era of \"radicalisation\"; of lone-wolves and kids succumbing to radical propaganda. Islamic State, as it confronts us in Australia, is not a conventional army or even a structured terrorist organisation, but a movement to which people recruit themselves. That's why the Prime Minister spends so much time talking about the role of the internet. It's why we talk about young Muslims being \"groomed\" by recruiters in a similar way to the victims of paedophiles. We're beginning to recognise that we can't simply bomb terrorism out of existence. The task now is to persuade people not to be seduced. No military can do that. That is a task of politics.The trouble, though, is that we take the logic of terrorism as politics only so far before we abandon it. Take the other major recent development: Australians who've gone to Syria only to discover that beneath Islamic State's utopian promise is a gruesome lie. Now they're trying to get out and come home. And as more Australians inevitably make the same discovery, we'll see a lot more of this.This might just be the best news we've had in a year. We've been sweating on precisely this kind of crack in the edifice of IS propaganda. The truth is that we can brand IS as \"death cult\" all we like. We can condemn it on some kind of relentless loop if it satisfies us but, in practical terms, none of it means a thing when it comes from the mainstream. Radical politics expects mainstream rejection – indeed it requires that for its own legitimacy. When we tell ourselves how evil IS is, we need to be clear: this is a performance for our own benefit, not to persuade people who might otherwise be charmed.The one thing radical politics cannot withstand is when its own true believers reveal its hypocrisy. The Caliph may have no clothes, but it's his subjects who must call it out. And yet it is precisely at this juncture that we refuse to take advantage.Asked about the possible return of such people, the government eagerly reiterates: we don't want them back, but if we must receive them, we have no interest in anything other than punishing them. That impulse is easy to understand: after all, the crime is clear. But is the impulse strategic? Are these people of more use to us stuck in Syria than they would be telling other Australians about the horrors of IS with vastly more credibility than anyone else? Is the aim to punish them, or stem further recruitment? Are we after vengeance, or some manner of victory?To be clear, I'm not advocating such crimes go unpunished. Even the lawyers of these people accept they'll be prosecuted. But it's telling that we can see nothing beyond this; that we so resolutely refuse even to acknowledge this potential gift because we're too busy reiterating our hatred for these people. Somehow, it was easier to accept the idea of Soviet spies defecting to the West in the Cold War than it is for us to imagine someone might have joined ISIL naively, and has discovered their error.Maybe that's because they rejected us first. Maybe it's an extension of the catharsis we feel when we extinguish someone's citizenship. But here's the danger: by rejecting anything that doesn't begin and end with condemnation – as if by reflex – we're surrendering the politics of terrorism in precisely the way ISIL so effectively isn't. "], ["Watch out: this is a booby-trapped budget", "May 14, 2015", "281", " So, what now? Now that a government that once made a budget surplus the key determinant of government competence has reached a point where it cannot even forecast one, and yet claims victory. Now that a government once so proudly congratulating itself for its \"tough\" decisions has abandoned most of them and gleefully refused  to make any more. Now that the Coalition has ended up more or less where Labor did: trying to stimulate a spluttering economy at the expense of a balanced budget.It's not the U-turns that intrigue me. Politics is, after all, a never-ending festival of backflips, sometimes for the better. It is the fact that if you squint - really, really hard - you can see the ghost of a new consensus emerging. The big question in politics, bigger even than who is in power, is who is setting the terms of the debate. This, for its entire life, was the previous Labor government's precise problem. It spent years playing on the Coalition's terms, trying to prove it could deliver a surplus, and asking to be judged accordingly. Now, it's the Coalition asking to be judged on Labor's terms. \"I don't want anyone to say that this is an unfair budget,\" said Tony Abbott ahead of his sophomore effort. This - and not a focus on the deficit - was the test of success. So he shovelled money at small business.Maybe we're agreed, then. Prioritise economic growth over a surplus for the next few years, and don't smash the poor and vulnerable. Truth be told, that's pretty much what the OECD asked us to do last year. It's what the bulk of economists have been recommending for an age, even while the previous Labor government dutifully ignored them. Maybe it took a year of catastrophic polling for this government to listen, but in a fashion, it has. Leaving the cynicism for a moment, that deserves some congratulations.Which is what makes the next bit so puzzling. Confronted with the obvious questions about the suddenly extinguished budget emergency - noting particularly that the numbers are worse now than when the \"emergency\" was first declared - the Prime Minister unleashed a reflex: \"every Coalition budget should be a tax-cutting budget\". Except, if you keep doing that, eventually your budget is truly exploded. To put it in the folksy household budget terms politicians so adore, it's a bit like someone whose family is struggling with bills marching into the boss' office at the start of every year and demanding a pay cut.  At some point, the government will need more tax. And yet at the merest whiff of the thought, Abbott instinctively becomes an opposition leader again: \"It's so typical of the Labor Party that they immediately want to see more tax, not less\" he boomed last week. This week, he embellished: \"They all live on Planet Tax ... this man [Bill Shorten] is the taxing expert of our country\".  And yet, this government has just launched its own tax review. A review that specifically contemplates raising the GST and shrinking the loopholes in negative gearing and capital gains tax. A review that questions the tax concessions on superannuation, echoing the concerns of former Commonwealth Bank chiefs and treasury secretaries past and present who agree these concessions are poorly targeted, skewed to the wealthy and cost the budget a monstrous amount. A review that allowed the Treasurer to boast that everything was up for grabs: \"We haven't done what our predecessors did and start ruling things in and out\". That criticism of Labor - based on its handling of the Henry Tax Review - is entirely justified. Or at least it was for the five minutes it took for his boss to do the same thing. Now, Abbott is apparently ruling out everything that's called a tax.That can only mean one thing, assuming the government still cares about the budget at all: more cuts. Lots of them. Serious cuts. Cuts like the ones that set the country on fire and decimated the government's political prospects a year ago. Even as it stands, the government's forecast reduced deficits over time rely on one of the most controversial cuts of them all: the $80 billion it took away from health and education in last year's budget. That's still there. In fact, it's among the biggest elements in this budget. There can only be more of that kind of thing to come. And the thing about cuts is they almost always affect the most disadvantaged people most, for the very good reason that they're usually the ones already most reliant on government spending. That revives the fairness problem. And that would take this government back to ground zero.That's why it's worth remembering how we got here. How it is the government ended up with such a diabolical debut budget that it had to abrogate all of its principles within a year. That budget was a product of a series of contradictory promises: to abolish taxes, cut nothing and somehow return the budget to surplus. Something had to give. Abbott's pre-election promises meant he had booby-trapped his own budget.But now the government is booby-trapping future ones. It's pledging to reduce the debt, raise no taxes and always be fair. Again, something will have to give. So again, what now? Because if recent history has taught us anything, it's that you can win elections on such contradictory foundations, but it's diabolical to govern on them. "], ["Why Andrew Chan and Myuran Sukumaran never stood a chance ", "May 1, 2015", "458", " Andrew Chan and Myuran Sukumaran are not simply the victims of their own crimes and a sadly corrupted judicial process. In a tragic way, they are so much less than that: pawns surrendered for ostensibly greater things. Now that it is done, we can admit the truth we were suppressing – that they never stood a chance. All the videos and the vigils, all the diplomacy and the lobbying, were never going to conjure a miracle. Their lives stood at the intersection of a suite of circumstances that had ordained a course for them. And perhaps most gallingly, those circumstances had nothing to do with them. Their deaths are simply the debris.It begins with their arrest, and a thing called the Treaty of Mutual Assistance on Criminal Matters. Chances are Chan and Sukumaran had never heard of this, but – their own catastrophic decision to traffic heroin aside – it might just be the single biggest reason they are now dead. That treaty requires our police to help their Indonesian counterparts with criminal investigations; to locate and identify potential criminals. And it's under these arrangements that the AFP decided to tell the Indonesians about the Bali nine's trafficking plans. They did it in writing in the most explicit terms: \"should they suspect that Chan and/or the couriers are in possession of drugs at the time of their departure (from Indonesia, they should) take what action they deem appropriate\". Then they wrote another letter telling the Indonesians the dates and times of their flights home to Australia, advising them to make their arrests on that day. And so the Indonesians did what they deemed appropriate. Ultimately, as it turned out, that involved a bullet through the heart.It's not every day a country's authorities play a key role in having its own citizens put to death in a foreign country. Exactly why we did this has never been fully explained. We know the AFP has the right under the treaty to refuse assisting the Indonesians in cases where the death penalty may apply. We also know they can insist on an assurance that the death penalty won't be applied before they co-operate. But it's true this only applies when charges are pending, and in the Bali nine's case, they hadn't even been arrested, much less come near being charged. This, I can only guess, is the AFP's reasoning. But we shouldn't be guessing. It is a good thing that they'll finally tell their story before a parliamentary committee.But whatever the technical explanation, they can only underscore the broader reason. This was 2005. Three years after the Bali bombings, three months before London. We were in the throes of the War on Terror, worried about Indonesian terrorist groups and desperate to beef up Indonesian policing. We wanted their co-operation on terrorism, they wanted our co-operation on drugs. The Bali nine fit this bill. In this sense, Chan and Sukumaran are collateral damage in our War on Terror.That put them at the mercy of the Indonesian justice system, clearly given to harsh penalties and struggling with corruption. At length their only hope would reside not in law, but in politics. Their lives would rest on the whims of the Indonesian president, and the power of Australian diplomacy. Here again, circumstance was conspiring against them. Joko Widodo is a new president, searching for authority. His win followed a bruising campaign against a former military general with a strong nationalist streak and a sobering human rights history. Thus was Jokowi – the anti-corruption, pro-human-rights candidate – mercilessly attacked for being soft, insufficiently patriotic. And so his early period in office seems to have been all about fighting this perception. Within months he had ordered that three Vietnamese fishing boats that entered Indonesian waters be sunk, and pledged to commence executing drug convicts. Mercy was quite simply not an option for a president obsessed with the politics of toughness for his own domestic purposes. Hence the summary dismissal of clemency pleas. Hence his failure even to grasp the basics of Chan and Sukumaran's case. When he thundered about the drugs they were bringing into Indonesia, he revealed not only that he had no idea they were in fact leaving for Australia, but that any such facts would disintegrate before the demands of his hairy-chested political narrative. It takes an enormous amount of political capital to dissuade a politician in that sort of mood. Australia simply didn't have that capital. In fact, we had been systematically torching it under successive governments. These themes are well rehearsed now: suspending beef exports, spying, and our belligerent approach to border protection with scant regard for Indonesia's concerns or even sovereignty. Indonesia's anger has been clear and growing for years now. No doubt some of that rage is cynically confected for domestic consumption, but the underlying sense that we feel entitled to push them around is not mere theatre. In seeking clemency we were asking for a favour – one that would cost Jokowi some skin. And we were asking at a time when they were hardly inclined to give it. That was Chan's and Sukumaran's final disaster.Perhaps at another time, in another political world, these men would have been spared. Perhaps their comprehensive rehabilitation would have counted for something. But at this time, in this world, they were rendered the most peripheral characters in their own tragic story. Everywhere they went they were in someone's sights. And everywhere they turned was an altar on which they would be sacrificed. "], ["In opposing the anti-vaccination movement, a sledgehammer cannot win battle of the needle", "April 17, 2015", "372", " Let me be clear. I am no fan of the anti-vaccination movement. I can't stand the free-riding hypocrisy that, under the protective, disease-free cover of everyone else's dutiful vaccination, affords itself the luxury of a \"personal choice\" to abstain. I shudder at the easy suspicion of profit-hungry \"Big Pharma\" that somehow vanishes at the feet of essential oil merchants or alternative therapists, despite their own bulging profits.I detest the unprincipled scepticism of medical science that so brazenly rejects the prevention  vaccination offers, but the moment something strikes, rushes to the emergency ward with total trust, seeking a cure. And the sheer quackery that, even after the most thorough scientific discrediting, persists in connecting vaccination to autism? As the father of an autistic son, this stirs in me a uniquely furious revulsion. I lack the words for it, and words are kind of what I do.But rage is the enemy of wisdom. It delivers no understanding of the anti-vaccination problem (which it greatly exaggerates), and no insight that might solve it. It feels good to vent rage, but frankly, whatever we decide to do about vaccination, the aim shouldn't be to make me feel good. That's what we decided to do this week with our \"no jab, no pay\" policy. There's something purging about attacking welfare payments. This is how we express who we hate. When we condemn someone to a life without welfare we're doing more than denying them money: we're sending them into a symbolic exile. Welfare is our way of expressing whatever tiny residue remains of social solidarity. To be ineligible is to be outcast, excluded from the social contract. That's why we so gleefully withdraw it from people we feel have violated the pact – lately, terrorists and anti-vaxxers. It's as though it's the final site of moral judgment left in our post-moral society. It is therefore where we begin the ritual stripping of rights.Is that the aim, though? Are we looking for a symbolic excommunication here? Or are we trying to get more people immunised? Our political class (of almost every stripe) will admit only to the latter, but if we take them at their word, we run into problems. As several health experts agreed this week, withdrawing welfare from anti-vaxxers is unlikely to make much practical difference for the very simple reason that they aren't typically on welfare in the first place. If this policy has any benefit at all, it is likely to be where people have simply forgotten to get their vaccinations up to date. And that's great. But there is surely a less punitive and more effective way to achieve this. You know, one that doesn't mean only rich people have the right to forget.We're failing to understand that vaccine refusal isn't some garden variety act of neglect or parental irresponsibility. It's not mere thoughtlessness. It's a conviction. It fits within a world view, and is alloyed to a broader politics. These politics are diverse, and change through the years, but they've always been there, ever since the first attempts at compulsory vaccination in the 19th century.  Back then many anti-vaxxers were from the working class. For them, vaccination was a form of class oppression: it was the ruling class treating their inferiors as the very personification of disease; as though poor people were themselves contagious. Theirs was a protest not just against vaccine, but against the idea of policing and dominating the working class. Their middle-class counterparts objected more on libertarian grounds. Like many of today's American anti-vaxxers, they simply held the government has no business being in our lives and rejected outright the idea of being policed through medical treatment.  If there is a truly modern strain of anti-vaccination, it is the New Age objector; suspicious of the whole enterprise of medical science, entranced by the human body's ability to heal itself, forever celebrating the natural over the synthetic. For them, health is not granted by chemicals. It is, instead, socially determined. It's about your diet, your environment, the depth of your friendships. But this, too, reflects deeper political convictions that object not merely to the act of vaccination, but the whole onslaught of capitalism. This posits a world where the irresistible power of money and politics combine to turn every human problem into a profit; where products we don't need are forced upon us and our humanity buried beneath mounds of branded debris. This is not a politics of selfishness. It is instead a politics about power. They resist the corporate onslaught, and in the process seek to empower themselves.It is only when you recognise that this is a problem of politics – rather than a battle of wills – that you can see where the \"no jab, no pay\" approach might lead. Perhaps you will never convince the hardcore anti-vaxxers who will happily sacrifice some welfare payments for their principles in the rare case it comes to that. But between the hardcore groupings are those who are more sceptical of mass vaccination than irascibly opposed. They're the ones broadly sympathetic with the libertarian or anti-corporate concerns at play, but perhaps unsure about the application of these ideas to vaccination. They're the ones who, with the right handling, might just be persuaded.  But what would someone like that make of this latest piece of political theatre? If you're on the verge of believing this is some form of government control, is anything more likely to tip you over the edge than the government resorting to force? That's the way radical politics works. It gains its strength from the very fact of its mainstream isolation.You don't win such political debates with a sledgehammer. You  win them with persuasion, and occasionally guile. Some American states have had success by allowing broad grounds for refusal, but requiring burdensome paperwork from anyone seeking to refuse. That whittles refusal down only to the true believers who can be bothered, which greatly reduces the threat to public health.  What it doesn't do, is take away people's rights, thereby encouraging those with alternative politics to harden their positions. What it doesn't do, is transform a public health issue into trench warfare. And that's ultimately what we need, because if there's anything worse than a war, it's one waged mainly to gratify ourselves. "], ["Job done: Tony Abbott promises dull budget, but when did Australia's debt become manageable?", "March 20, 2015", "201", " What a sales pitch! Dull. Not visionary. Not even tough or \"courageous\" (as political euphemism would have it). Dull. \"This will be a budget to bore you witless,\" Tony Abbott seemed to be saying this week. It will be a festival of tedium. A shrine to the uninteresting. Ignore it. Please.This, of course, will not happen. No budget in living memory will be so anticipated because no budget has had such a politically self-destructive prequel. It's now simply a matter of record that last year's budget obliterated Abbott's electoral standing and emboldened an already unwieldy senate to dig in against him. Abbott may well regard that senate as \"feral\", but the only reason it can enjoy being so unapologetically difficult is that the public had first declared his budget to be feral.  The senators, far from irresponsible spoilers, were cast as valued protectors: guardians of civilised domesticity, holding back the savagery of a budgetary invasion. On some level, the government must know this. No doubt this is precisely why the government is now so desperate to be dull - and above all, inoffensive.But paradoxically, Abbott's pledge of a dull budget is wildly ambitious. This is mainly because it is asking us to believe several contradictory things at once. First, that the Coalition inherited a budget emergency. Second that its job of responding to that emergency has been relentlessly sabotaged by the opposition and other senate riff-raff. Third, that in spite of this relentless blocking, the budgetary repair job has somehow been done. Turns out the opposition weren't blocking terribly much. Or that the stuff they were blocking was unnecessary to fix the budget, anyway, in which case they weren't as irresponsible as we were being asked to believe.About the only thing clear about this is the dogma Abbott is urging us to accept: \"Under Labor the budget was completely out of control. Under us, it's manageable\". Then, in case we missed it: \"we have got the budget situation from out of control, to manageable\".But how? It's a strange claim to be making when you've just spent the last few weeks systematically abandoning your own least popular savings measures. The GP co-payment is gone, we think, along with the billions it was forecast to save. The government recently found unspecified millions to give back to a car industry that is already determined to leave our shores, and gave in on a pay rise for our defence force personnel it had so long resisted. Now, the government's plans for deregulation of university fees, which would allow it to pocket further billions in education costs, lie unambiguously in tatters.  Ask the government what it has achieved, and the answer will focus on the abolition of the carbon and mining taxes, both of which cost money, the former, billions. Beyond that, there's not much left of its first term agenda. So much has now been shed that we're in the process of performing the budget's last rites. When that is complete, it will have left behind few survivors, and the funeral will have cost something in the order of $30 billion. At what point, exactly, did all that become manageable?Meanwhile, our economic growth is modest, our unemployment is high, our interest rates are already very low (meaning we can't stimulate growth very much by cutting them) and the stuff we've been selling to China keeps getting cheaper and less profitable. That's not the government's fault. But it is now the government's problem, because all this means it's about to collect a whole lot less tax. In the midst of all this, Abbott's talking up plans for childcare and small business in the next budget. This, it seems, is code for some kind of tax cut, and a sizeable chunk of spending to make childcare more affordable. All this might be cracking, politically-friendly policy, but it's also potentially some pretty hefty spending. And for all that, there's no guarantee this will achieve the political miracle Abbott is seeking. If you believe, as several cabinet ministers apparently do, that last year's budget failed because it had no narrative to explain it, then that raises a thorny question: what is the narrative of this one? \"Dull\" isn't quite a narrative. \"Job done\" simply isn't believable. \"Jobs and growth\" might explain any spending and tax cuts, but that would be a very Labor narrative that would require us to forget all the politics of the past six years and decide that budget deficits really aren't big a deal.  Abbott has so snookered himself that whether he increases the deficit or reduces it, he is inviting the opposition to lash him. What he needs is a way to reduce the deficit without resorting to further cuts he simply cannot sell. And anything that smells remotely like a cut will be scoured for the whiff of offensiveness.That leaves him with only one option. Make this a budget about the wealthy. It's not entirely true that the last budget had no narrative - in fact it had a very coherent one. The trouble was that it was the budget's opponents that supplied it: a budget about hitting those who could least afford it. That's a question of values, of fairness. It's why the government is still unpopular despite having dropped just about all the policies that made it so. There's an overarching objection to the spirit of the last budget. The next one needs to redress that. It needs to make a statement. It needs, say, two big policy items that raise money off the wealthy rather than the poor.It's a risk, to be sure. It clearly violates Abbott's own instincts, and risks offending his government's last remaining friends in the electorate. But it's equally clear that neither those instincts, nor those friends have saved him this far. Perhaps it's time for something bold, unexpected, suggesting bright renewal. And these, I fear, are all antonyms of dull. "], ["Bomb Islamic State: is that our only strategy?", "March 6, 2015", "193", " Death cult. There's a certain catharsis in saying it, isn't there? Somehow, when you're confronted with the jawdropping atrocities Islamic State churns out with gruesome frequency, \"terrorist\" seems puny, unsatisfactory. We're looking for something that distils our rage and drips with disdain. So, death cult: it implies a kind of unhinged violence directed to no rational purpose; a group beyond comprehension that appeals only to those on the limits of sanity. So, for instance, when three young Englishwomen skip the country to join, we have no explanation other than that they were brainwashed, or that their decision, in Julie Bishop's phrase, \"defies logic\". That, after all, is the nature of cults.If only it were true. If only IS were a small, tightly controlled group under the command of a single charismatic leader on whom everything depends. If only it were destined to go the way of so many cults, burning destructively but briefly before disappearing with little trace in some tragic implosion. But it isn't. It's an expanding group forged in the collapsing politics of the Middle East. IS's plain barbarism shouldn't obscure this fact. Its existence is not harebrained. It is deeply political, and those who support, or even merely tolerate it, have political reasons for their decisions.Which brings me to Tony Abbott's announcement this week that we'd be sending another tranche of troops to Iraq in our ever-expanding military campaign. They'll be the latest soldiers trying valiantly to train the Iraqi Army. In some ways, there's less to this than meets the eye. We already have troops in Iraq doing this job, and it reflects precisely the strategy we're pursuing against IS: bombard them from the air and get local groups – including the Iraqi Army – to fight them on the ground. Once you've committed to that, there's nothing particularly controversial about increasing troop numbers doing the job. The trouble, though, is that it seems to be the only card we have to play. Outraged by IS, we'll send soldiers. Concerned they aren't retreating in the way we'd like, we'll send more. That, it seems, is the strategy.But we've been failing at this strategy for nearly a dozen years. America spent something like $US40 billion on the task. Soon, it became a NATO project. Naturally, Australia helped out. So did Jordan, South Korea and Romania. Iran, too, struck similar deals with the Iraqi government. And more than a decade of multi-national training later, Iraqi soldiers in Mosul simply abandoned their posts when IS rolled into town last year. Precisely why we think a few hundred extra Australian soldiers will succeed where years of grander, more expensive efforts so miserably failed, remains unexplained.But the bigger problem is that the approach remains a narrow military one. It has no obvious political dimension to it: no clearly explained account of why IS has grown so rapidly, how it took major Iraqi cities with so little resistance, and why it might prove so difficult to dislodge. But it is precisely these things that have the most to teach us. It's easy to forget that IS is scarcely the unstoppable force of our nightmares. It spread through the Sunni areas of Syria and northern Iraq mainly because no one in those regions particularly wanted to stand in their way. That included the Iraqi military, whose Sunni representatives clearly had little fidelity to the Iraqi cause. In brief, IS succeeded because it carried more good will in the regions it conquered than the Iraqi state. Not because Iraqi Sunnis are blood-loving nihilists – indeed, it was the Iraqi Sunnis who  had expelled IS's predecessor organisation, al-Qaeda in Iraq. It is rather a story of just how rent Iraq truly is; just how colossal a failure its reconstruction after we invaded it has been. And it is a story of monstrous Sunni resentment at the pro-Shiite excesses of the Iraqi state. Perhaps our greatest mistake in this regard was to disband Saddam Hussein's military machine entirely, letting it become instead the largely incompetent, Shiite-dominated muscle for an increasingly Shiite-supremacist nation under Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki. With the Americans gone, Sunni protests were violently quashed, Sunni politicians hounded from office and Shiite death squads marauded far too freely. This, we watched from afar, apparently unmoved by the fact that Iraqi Sunnis were now looking for someone – anyone – prepared to stand up for them. While we were watching, IS made that offer.What's our counter offer?  Because if we're serious about defeating IS, we'll have to do more than train an Iraqi military widely regarded by Iraqi Sunnis as a tool of Shiite oppression. We'll have to find a way to win over the Sunni tribes of northern Iraq with a political future they can believe in; a future that just might inspire them to turn on IS the way they turned on al-Qaeda in Iraq. That means a more inclusive Iraqi state, and on this score Iraq's new Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi is making some positive noises. We're also helped considerably by the astonishing scale of IS's barbarism, which is causing many Sunnis living under its regime de la terreur a severe case of buyer's remorse. But if our only plan is to bomb IS into history, we might just lose these advantages.  We also might leave something worse in its place, just as IS took the place of al-Qaeda after we'd tried bombing them. The question we face now is not as simple as: more or less war? It is: what else? What's our political strategy?  And I'm not sure the death cult paradigm delivers us an answer. "], ["Fuse lit with rhetorical bomb about Indonesia", "February 20, 2015", "506", " So, this is what it looks like when you outsource your foreign policy to Alan Jones. \"You do what you like, but we gave you a billion dollars when you were hit by the tsunami,\" he boomed recently on Q&A, his message directed squarely at the Indonesian President, who had rejected Andrew Chan and Myuran Sukumaran's death-row pleas to have their lives spared. I'm with Jones on the cause. Very rarely would an execution be more needless than in this apparently inevitable case. Rarely have we seen better cases of demonstrated remorse and rehabilitation. But to use aid – for a disaster in which more than 100,000 Indonesians died – as leverage? That's taking us to dark places.Perhaps it was a fit of frustration that led Tony Abbott down precisely this path. After every effort the government has made, that frustration would be understandable. Perhaps Abbott calculated that the cause was so utterly hopeless that he had given up entirely on convincing the Indonesians to relent, and chose instead to play to his domestic audience. Or perhaps Abbott didn't grasp the gravity of suggesting that Indonesia \"reciprocate\" for our aid with clemency. But that's the problem. Abbott isn't running talkback. He's running international diplomacy. And in that world of maddeningly polite, highly coded speech, this is a rhetorical bomb. It says our aid is conditional, that it imposes obligations and that if we feel those obligations haven't been met, we might just withhold it in future. That's a hell of thing to imply, even in private.  Especially when you're a country currently slashing foreign aid, and already hugely outspent by countries like China.  But said in public, it's a wealthy country with far less leverage than it thinks trying to lord it over a developing one.Hence Indonesia's extraordinary diplomatic serve: \"no one responds well to threats,\" declared a spokesman for the foreign ministry, which sounds ominously like a diplomat's way of saying \"you've just blown it\". It's a particularly sharp response that reveals a particularly sharp sensitivity. Partly this is about the politics of drug smuggling in Indonesia.  Every nation has its irrational belligerences; its issues where the politics dictate it is impossible to be too tough, where compassion is recast as weakness, and weakness is unforgivable. For us, it's probably boat people. For Indonesia, it's probably drugs. And when that's the political logic, the very last thing you can be seen to be doing is capitulating before a threat. \"If you need something from somebody always give that person a way to hand it to you,\" advises one of Sue Monk Kidd's characters in The Secret Life of Bees. That is precisely what our tsunami aid manoeuvre has denied Indonesia.But this stand-off is also about something bigger. Perhaps the most alarming aspect of Indonesia's response is its allegation that \"people will show their true colours\": that our \"threats\" are not an isolated faux pas, but reveal something deeply characteristic about us as a nation. That through Indonesian eyes, this is all part of a broader pattern of objectionable behaviour. Those objections are well rehearsed: we treat Indonesia's sovereignty with contempt, ignore their cries of offence, and then feel entitled to order them to do our bidding. It's at moments like these that such Indonesian grievances come home to roost.Some of this tension is ancient: our support for East Timorese independence is scarcely forgotten, and fuels a long-standing fear we want to break chunks off Indonesia's territory. But much of it is recent, too. Some of this is transient – as with Indonesia's anger over the Gillard government's snap suspension over the live cattle trade. Other objections are more enduring, as with our asylum-seeker boats turnback policy – an objection only amplified when it became clear Australian naval vessels had crossed, unauthorised, into Indonesian waters. It's the kind of thing we forget and dismiss, but to a nation like Indonesia with a weak navy and a gigantic coastline to defend, it feels like a serious violation of its borders. Meanwhile, both sides of politics have long demanded Indonesia crack down on people smuggling in a way that barely acknowledges that the asylum seekers there don't want to stay, and Indonesia doesn't want to keep them. That makes it far more our problem than theirs, but one we've insisted they solve. We got a sense of the level of tension this causes when Indonesia decided to release the transcript of conversations between both countries' foreign ministers in which Julie Bishop asked for asylum-seeker issues to be kept \"behind the scenes\". This was a clear, angry attempt to embarrass Australia.Then, of course, there were the revelations the Rudd government had tapped the phones of the Indonesian president and his wife. Indonesia swiftly demanded an apology, to which the new Abbott government responded by refusing even to acknowledge the practice, much less pledge it would be abandoned. Abbott defended Australia's \"intelligence gathering\" as \"reasonable\", and Indonesia recalled its ambassador and temporarily withdrew all co-operation on people smuggling. Meanwhile, perhaps for colour, the government's pollster, Mark Textor, likened the Indonesian foreign minister to a \"1970s Filipino porn star\" and upon learning of Indonesia's offence throughout the episode, tweeted that \"no-one gives a rat's arse in the real world\".Well, it's all pretty real now. Sure, hope is eternal, but we're at the point of hoping for a miracle. Perhaps it was always destined to be this way. I'm certainly not blaming the Australian government for Chan's and Sukumaran's plight, and such is Indonesia's dogmatism on this that there's every chance the result would be the same, however pristine the relationship. But whatever the case, the final exchanges of this tragedy have revealed something worth pondering: our relationship with Indonesia is in a state of disrepair.  And in that relationship, there will surely come times when plenty of us will give whatever part of the rat you care to name. "], ["Coalition needs a heart transplant, not a facelift", "February 6, 2015", "328", " It's the repetition that gets me.  How precisely every Coalition minister presently denying there is any reality to the current bout of leadership speculation sounds like Gillard's ministers in 2013. How assuredly the unstoppable backbench revolt makes a mockery of these denials.  How Abbott now, like Gillard then, pleads with us to focus on policies rather than personalities – as though we've all just simultaneously decided, completely unprompted, that we'd rather our politics took the form of glossy magazines.But there's one inescapably large problem with this plea: the government's in trouble precisely because we have been focussing on policy. That was true for Labor, whose collapse in public support occurred the moment Kevin Rudd decided he no longer thought climate change mattered that much, and it is perhaps even truer for Abbott. In time, his first budget will become legend for the sheer breadth of its political self-destruction. It's not that the electorate didn't understand the suite of policies, or was distracted by personality politics. It's not that it was poorly explained (though on several levels, it was).  It's that the electorate grasped the underlying values of the government's maiden offering, and found it repugnant. It still does.That is perhaps the most significant unifying factor between the Liberal National disaster in Queensland and the one now unfolding in Canberra.  All the arguments about \"federal vs state\" factors overlook that these were perhaps the two most similar governments in Australia. Both debuted with monstrous budgets that showed a penchant for austerity politics. Both attacked the public service and declared an unshakeable love for privatisation. Both hacked into health. And both did so without declaring their intentions to the people who had just elected them. The problem is that both ran into the ideological limits of the electorate: limits they simply assumed didn't exist.So if it is to be leadership change for Abbott, what then? It's a far more important question than the one about whether or not a spill is coming in the first place. To see this, let's return to Labor's sorry experience. \"What then?\" is precisely the question Labor could never ultimately answer, and which ultimately condemned it to ignominy. Recall Bill Shorten's revealing admission in 2013 that he would vote for Gillard's demise, and Rudd's return, as a way of protecting Gillard's legacy. He would deliver us a new King, but in the service of his vanquished predecessor. A predecessor Shorten would slay so she might live.Got that? It's a frank admission that Labor's last coup was merely cosmetic: a facelift, not a heart transplant. There was no policy difference to note and no party renewal to spruik. Having been implored to overcome our shallow obsession with personality, we discovered that this seems to have been Labor's obsession, too.  And of course, it failed.That doesn't mean policy was irrelevant. Indeed Labor's problems arose partly because its policy was incoherent. Gillard's carbon tax disaster occurred only because she was so desperate to avoid a proper climate change policy that she went to the election proposing a citizens' assembly that would somehow devise her policy for her. \"No carbon tax\" was what you said when you had nothing serious to say. It was this policy vacuum that drew her into the broken promise  from which she never recovered. From there, the personalities took over, and Gillard was simply in too weak a position to withstand Rudd's incessant blows.Whatever happens now, the Coalition cannot afford to be seduced by such facelifts. That is not to say it should rule out a coup: of all the people praying for Abbott's survival, a goodly portion of them will be in the Labor party. But it is to say that if the government does opt for a new head, it must also seek a new heart. And here, the Coalition has one meaningful advantage. Abbott's public critics – from Dennis Jensen and Mal Brough to Andrew Laming – are mounting their attacks on clear policy bases. They're criticising Medicare co-payments and defence force pay. They're charging that the policy settings are inconsistent. In short, they're siding against unpopular policy and specifying the very problems they'd expect a new leader to fix. Abbott, of course, can do nothing about them, partly because it is not in his nature to admit policy mistakes, and partly because any change of direction from him will quickly be dismissed as cynical politicking. But a new leader would have at least a crude blueprint for renewal.Which is a start. But at this point, it's also not quite enough. The Coalition needs something bigger, and more fundamental than some policy tweaks. If Abbott has a successor, that person has to give this government a clear, agreeable organising principle. In short, it needs a narrative. It needs an overarching story of the world that makes sense of the pain we're being asked to wear. It needs to tell us not merely why it wants to charge people more for GP visits, but rather the grander philosophical basis on which it decides who should bear the costs of reform. It needs this because that is precisely the charge against it. Not that it's made tough decisions, but that it has made discriminatory and cruel ones. That its philosophy of pain is simply that it should be visited upon people it doesn't like: poor people, sick people, young people. Despite all the words it has ever said in its defence, the government has never clearly answered that charge. Even now, as Abbott seeks some miraculous reset and his supporters insist there's nothing to see here except a government listening and improving, it's a charge that still goes unanswered. At some point, though, the Coalition will have to engage with this. And as long as it doesn't, it makes not a jot of difference who's leader. "], ["Plane crashes, terrorism, random violence - new realities amid our relative security", "January 8, 2015", "450", " Is this just normal now? That's perhaps the most disturbing thought I had as news of another terrorist attack, this time in Paris, broke. Somehow this has begun to look familiar, like an episode in a show we've seen before. The feeling is familiar too: when you awake to something catastrophic, unprecedented and unthinkable – or so you thought.  This feeling, more than anything, seems to have defined the past year; a year that, by apparent consensus, was positively, gallingly crappy. It's not just terrorism – to which I'll return, soon – it's everything. It's the feeling I had as watching the debris and dead bodies from that AirAisa flight being retrieved, it was like witnessing a ghoulish symbolic performance of a year in review. Little symbolises the unique squalor of 2014 like the bizarrely tragic year in aviation. Surely the worst ever.Except that it wasn't. Not by a long shot. \"By numbers – the safest year in modern aviation history,\" trumpeted the Aviation Safety Network.  That might be hard to take as you contemplate the sorry fate of Malaysia Airlines and its passengers. But there it is: only eight planes crashed in 2014. That's three fewer than the previous best, a couple of years ago. And this in an age when there are more planes in the air than ever before. Really, it was a relative triumph. Do the statistics lie?Well, yeah, a bit. But not shamelessly. Judged by numbers of deaths, rather than crashes, 2014 is the worst year since the late '90s. Even so 2014 was still better than almost every year before that going back to 1960. Plot them on a graph and last year doesn't disturb the general downward trend. Turns out it doesn't look as out of place as it felt.That sort of thing happened quite bit last year. That's not to deny that it was objectively terrible in many ways, often in the ways we didn't feel so keenly. There is no silver lining I can find to 7000 Ebola deaths, for instance, even if this seemed to lack the emotional kick of Phillip Hughes'. But it's also true that the things that angered, depressed and panicked us were less than they appeared.We began with Daniel Christie, whose brief 2014 was spent entirely in a coma until his family ended life support after a few days. One punch, a fractured skull, then death. The facts are so arresting precisely because they are so simple and so few. And so, in a flash came the media coverage, the political responses and the public awareness campaigns. The \"king hit\" became the \"coward's punch\", and whatever it was called it became the target of a new criminal offence. Sentencing became mandatory. Venues had lockouts and new, enforced closing times. We had been provoked by a new and growing scourge. Australia had a major drinking problem, and with it a marauding violence problem, and Christie was the face of it.And yet. The statistical truth is that we're drinking less than we were around the time Kevin Rudd ousted John Howard, and massively less than we did in the '70s and '80s when, apparently, we were perpetually tanked. Violence on licensed premises is dropping, too, and so are alcohol-related assaults. We're even going to hospital less for alcohol-related reasons. And this with a growing population.Of course, none of that helps the Christies. And – to be sure – none of it means there isn't a serious problem we've been ignoring for too long. But there is something to learn from the way a problem can suddenly become a panic.So back to terrorism, that other definitive blight on last year, and given the tragic events in Paris, quite probably this one. The frightening emergence of ISIS abroad, then in a more symbolic form at home tell us this is no mere illusion. We witnessed the first domestic casualties of Islamist terrorism we've had. This all has a vaguely apocalyptic feel, and yet when more than 20 Australian soldiers were killed in Afghanistan in 2010-11 it hardly gave us pause. That just felt normal. So we performed the customary ceremonies and moved on to worrying about the carbon tax which, by contrast, seemed to scare the pants of us.Here's the thing: in our streets, in our bank accounts and in the air, we in Australia lead about the safest, most secure lives of any people. Ever. Our real income is up and the road toll is down (the lowest since 1945, by the way). We live without any genuine prospect of political strife. We're not about to be invaded or bombed with nuclear weapons – our most feared enemies have knives and guns, not armies in tanks. We're not likely to be decimated by some disease or virus – Ebola or otherwise. Yes we have problems, but they're the kind most of our species could only have dreamed of having. And yet that's so easy to forget because there's this continuous, churning fear.Our mortal selves aren't under threat, here. But the myths we've built about ourselves very much are. The myth that our addiction to alcohol is innocently, endearingly larrikin, for example. Or that the problems of the world – like Russia's incursion into Ukraine or the disaster of Iraq and Syria – have no call on us and simply don't raise their heads in Sydney or Paris. Indeed the myth – that incidentally underscores how cheerfully we'll slash foreign aid – that we can set ourselves apart as (largely uninterested) onlookers: that the world is a sideshow to which we'll occasionally buy a ticket, but not our society.Maybe we don't realise it yet, but 2014 might just be the year those myths died. That, I think, is why it hurts and shocks so much. This is as painful a process for a society as losing people. It's not just that people perished and dangers emerged. It's that those deaths and dangers weren't meant to happen. Not to us. And I can't find any statistics that can remove that feeling. "], ["Sydney gunman Man Haron Monis a real sheikh only to himself", "December 17, 2014", "568", " We can't stop this.  Sorry, but we can't.  As we ruminate on a thousand hows and what ifs – such as how the hell did someone like Man Haron Monis find himself out on bail – there's a brutal truth we can't escape: we're trying to impose order on chaos; to convince ourselves that everything can some day be under our control, when it just can't.  Tony Abbott deserves lasting admiration for having the courage to admit as much.From all appearances, this was as crude and as solitary as it gets.  There's no high-tech wizardry on show.  There's no elaborate, maniacal plan worthy of a Hollywood supervillain.  There's not even a mastermind pulling strings to make this more coherent.  There is only a man, a gun and a flag.  The man and the gun we've seen before.  Indeed, we've seen it horrifically often: in Belgium just hours after Martin Place; at Port Arthur.  But the flag – that changes things.  It lends this the apocalyptic timbre that drives us so mad.  It's the thing in this episode that does the least damage – and the most.It's also the thing that makes this global.  There's every reason to suspect we're dealing with someone deranged here but many deranged gunmen have gone before him.  Only rarely do they associate themselves with the symbolic power of a global militant movement.  At no point in the history of our species have such human satellites, living beyond the margins of even the most marginal groups, had the power to do so: the power to become so much more than they are simply by attaching themselves to a symbol from another continent.  And right now, there is no symbol more potent and available than that of Islamic terrorism.So, Michael Zehaf-Bibeau and Martin Rouleau Couture in Canada.  Zale Thompson in New York.  Now Monis at Martin Place.  We're seeing this more now: troubled (often criminal) histories, possible mental illness, religious conversion, violence.  Monis apparently converted to Sunni Islam only recently, perhaps because you can't really claim to love IS when you're a Shiite and they're trying to exterminate you.  Islam has such permeable borders, such an absence of hierarchy, that anyone can become anything in their own mind.  Its symbols are available to anyone who wants to claim them and there is nothing anyone can do to stop them.  Australian Muslims had been disowning Monis for at least seven years.  They'd even expressed their concerns to the authorities.  But how can you stop the \"fake sheikh\" being real to himself?There's no control order regime to account for this.  There's no metadata inside an apparently deranged mind.  We're busy fretting about the terrorists' tools of the future – which is all fair enough – while they wreak havoc with the tools of the past.  Think about what we've seen lately, from Australia to North America: a knife, an axe, a couple of guns, even a car.  Perhaps the most profound aspect of our age is that the power to inflict carnage is now shared with the small to the invisible to the otherwise insignificant.  Man Haron Monis was so insignificant, hardly anyone knew him; so insignificant the system overlooked him.  And now he's history.But there's another history to be written here.  One that is very much in control.  It's a history written not just in the statements of leaders, but in the minutiae of our everyday interactions.  It's the history we glimpsed as the siege unfolded when a single, humble Australian decided to declare #illridewithyou in solidarity with Muslims too scared to ride public transport.  It's a history that commenced with the interfaith vigil held at the Lakemba and Auburn mosques.  And it's a history to be determined by what we decide this tragedy symbolises: the sordid ideology of a man who deserves to be forgotten or the greatest virtues of those of us left behind. "], ["Nothing can wipe the smile off this mug", "December 12, 2014", "372", " Tony Abbott is at his best when he has something to fight. Ask Kevin Rudd. Or Julia Gillard. Or Malcolm Turnbull. Abbott vanquished them all with brutal efficiency, mainly because he had a devastatingly clear line of attack. \"Great big toxic tax based on a lie,\" or something. Sure, that's more a mash-up than a quote, but with these eight words, Abbott destroyed three leaders. Even in power his best moments have come as he has seized upon an enemy, whether a Russian \"bully\" or an Islamist \"death cult\". But this week we've been asked to believe in a different character; a figure who looks and dresses like the pugilist we know, but whose every word presently seems to be of compromise and conciliation. \"This is a government which is always capable of listening, learning and improving\" he insisted as he unveiled an amended policy on GP co-payments. It was only one of three such announcements in half a week. First came Abbott's pledge to reconsider his paid parental leave scheme over summer, and last came his $200 million volte-face on contributing to an international climate change fund he clearly hates so much he said it was worthy of Bob Brown. But there's something revealing about the gently declaratory language, here. It's trying to convince us of something. It's like he's describing his attributes at a job interview. Trouble is he's had the job for a year, and he's not describing the guy we hired. Abbott's going for more than a policy change. He's going for a radical change in character. In modern politics conviction and compromise sit, lamentably, at opposite poles. Abbott styled himself as an avatar for austere conviction: the immovable tough guy for whom nothing could be worse than a \"dodgy deal\" with a minor party. Abbott created a political universe in which negotiation was almost dishonest – an abandonment of principles for political convenience. That, in brief, was his deadly portrait of Julia Gillard. Now, in the richest of ironies, he's forced to become her: an unloved prime minister, saddled with broken promises seeking the favour of minor parties and independents. If the electorate's emphatic attitude to so much of the Abbott government's budget is any guide, this is nothing less than necessary. But it's also nothing less than awkward, and that raises the serious risk that it will look insincere. Abbott needs to be supremely convincing here, and he's starting from a long way behind. When you've delivered perhaps the most friendless budget in living memory, then stood by it for seven long months with precious little hint of compromise, you can't simply smooth things over by proclaiming yourself to be a great listener. You need to demonstrate it. If you're trying to reboot your way out of disaster, you need to make it unmistakable. You need to change the game so completely that all the most serious charges against you become completely redundant in a single stroke. Anything less and the critique against you gets a reboot, too. And that, I suspect, is where Abbott runs aground. His compromises are real enough, but also modest enough that none of them cause his opponents to break stride. At the end of this week, the most stinging critiques engulfing the government remain undisturbed. Abbott's revised GP co-payment might take pity on kids, pensioners, veterans and concession card holders, but there are plenty of poor Australians besides these and it will still hit them hardest. Labor gets to make that argument again, now. And it even gets to repeat that the policy doesn't help the budget. All the savings are being parked in a medical research fund for over a decade instead of paying off the debt we've been told will bring Armageddon upon our kids. The numbers may have changed, but the narrative has not. It's a similar story on climate change. Our $200 million contribution is welcome (even if it does simply come from our foreign aid budget), but it does little to deal with the overall charge that this is a government taking the path of most resistance. Australia's abstinence from the climate change fund was the very least of the facts that buttressed this allegation. After all, what's $200 million for a fund like that when you're trying to abolish a $10 billion Clean Energy Finance Corporation that you've just finished telling the world is a similar, terrible concept? How does this cost-free gesture stand against the tide of reduced aspirations for renewable energy and a pointed commitment to a 2020 emissions reduction target that the government's own independent advice insists is way too skimpy? All this suggests that the government doesn't truly understand its present rejection. It seems to believe the electorate likes the government's general direction, but would rather it didn't quite go so far; that voters' concerns are really only matters of degree. In fact, those objections are philosophical. For better or worse, they don't object to the extent of the budget, but the very idea of it. You can't tinker your way out of that. That's the problem with being a fighter: you see compromise ultimately as defeat. Not a constructive process, but a destructive one to be considered only at the point of inevitable catastrophe. And so it cannot help but be half-hearted. \"We had a good policy in the first place. Now we have a better policy,\" said Abbott of his GP co-payment.  Such are the fighter's instincts that even at the moment of defeat, when you're trying to admit you got it wrong, you just can't help insisting that you've really been right all along. "], ["Coalition marooned in a sea of troubles", "November 28, 2014", "554", " Maybe leaders should just stop doing outdoor television interviews on the eve of an election. Remember Julia Gillard's \"no carbon tax\" declaration, standing in front of the Brisbane skyline? Sorry, of course you do. It's astonishing how much it resembles Tony Abbott's albatross. Abbott is standing in a stadium, as befits his relative sportiness, but this aside it's just about a perfect match. Each has given the most perfectly destructive grab: a crisp, unequivocal statement that promises in less than 10 seconds exactly the opposite of what they would come to do once the election was over. This week's focus has been on cuts to public broadcasting, but it's the sheer breadth of Abbott's promises – almost all of which are now violated – that makes it so compelling.  You'd think you could at least stumble or ramble a bit to draw out the clip and make it a little less usable. But no. By election eve you've learned your lines. It's only afterwards, apparently, that you forget them.This stuff can really hurt, as Gillard so brutally discovered. Abbott's case is perhaps a little less dire. His broken promises don't directly raise the cost of living, and so don't quite lend themselves to a carbon-tax-sized scare campaign. He doesn't lead a party desperate to tear itself apart to the point of being unelectable. He faces an Opposition Leader not remotely as effective as Abbott was himself. But Abbott has other problems that mean his broken promises operate more as a garnish. They don't need to be the whole catastrophe because they sit atop something more substantial. You see, the Abbott government is now in trouble. Really quite serious trouble. Trouble from which it will take a special effort to emerge.The hyperventilating about Abbott being a one-term Prime Minister has always struck me as the wishful thinking of those already implacably opposed to him, oblivious to the lessons of political history. Changes of government are rare and one-term governments almost mythical. But as I write this on the eve of an election that looks set to terminate a one-term government in Victoria, in which Victorian Liberals are describing Abbott's influence as poison, it is clear that political history is changing. Governments run their course quickly these days. Even the previous Labor era felt like two one-term governments, each of which ran aground at the first available poll. Last year we had three Prime Ministers, the Northern Territory had two Chief Ministers and Victoria had two Premiers. This year, New South Wales has done the same. Not one of these discarded leaders had been in the job for a complete electoral term. It's now possible Abbott might be the same.There's no singular issue responsible for this. That's actually the problem. The government is struggling not for anything particular it has done, but for who the electorate thinks it is. This isn't simply the government that cut ABC funding – far more modestly, as it happens, than Howard did before waltzing his way to electoral success.  This isn't the government that wants to increase student debts, or raise the cost of petrol, or charge poor people to visit the doctor, or take the dole away from young unemployed people. It's the government that wants to do all of these things. This isn't about policy. It's about values. Abbott's problem is that he's allowed a this image to solidify as his government's character.In a word, it's about fairness. And here – still – stands the government's budget which has become the lens through which all else is seen. Abbott can plausibly claim a mandate for taking action to improve the budget. In all likelihood he can even inflict some pain to get there.  But – as John Howard so frequently warned – you can only convince the electorate to hurt if they believe they're hurting fairly. And it is on precisely this score that Abbott has so dramatically lost the argument. There has been no compelling rebuttal to the claim that it is the poorest and the most vulnerable – low-income earners, pensioners, unemployed kids – who are being hit. This is how Abbott's parental leave policy – which was meant to be about empowering women – has instead become about class: about empowering rich people who happen to be women. It's how the government's perfectly sensible decision to unfreeze the excise on petrol suddenly became a war on poor motorists. And it's undoubtedly how any attempt by this government to advocate a raised GST, maturely or otherwise, will come to be seen. That's what happens when the narrative against you is clear, damaging and well set.The great predicament for Abbott is that by falling foul of the fairness test, he has wandered into one of Labor's very few remaining sweet spots. For decades now, Labor has struggled to explain its identity, which is why on, say, immigration or national security it finds itself hopelessly trapped, tiptoeing inauthentically along a line largely determined by the Coalition. Labor's most authentic moment arrived in 2007, when Howard served up a fight on WorkChoices. This was Labor in its element. Fairness isn't quite as sharp, but it at least feels like a Labor theme. And now Abbott's compelled to fight on that turf.Abbott somehow needs to break the thematic stranglehold. Perhaps that's why he has reportedly decided to dump his GP co-payment. It's why he'll probably, under great sufferance, dump his paid parental leave scheme. And maybe this will be enough to save him once he passes a more generous budget or two before the next election. But it's getting to the point where he needs a grand gesture that impacts the wealthy. A temporary debt levy on high-income earners is all it has right now, and it's already been forgotten. He needs something truly big; something like a crackdown on superannuation tax concessions for high-income earners which could raise billions. But ask a Coalition MP why they have studiously avoided this and you'll get a simple answer: we promised before the election we wouldn't touch super. And you can't break your promises, can you? "], ["Gesture politics wax as power to control wanes", "November 14, 2014", "185", " I'll get to the shirt-front in a minute. First, though, it's worth remembering how we got here. How so very livid we were about the MH17 disaster. How this was something more visceral than mourning, something that demanded retribution. How immediately the political class distilled this rage. Tony Abbott quickly dubbed it a \"crime\" rather than an \"accident\" and Bill Shorten described it as a \"tyrannical, wild act\" presumably carried out by \"separatist terrorists\". In a flash we were off to the UN Security Council to secure \"full, impartial and international\" investigation – which, truth be told, sat a fraction awkwardly with the fact that we'd already decided who was to blame. Whatever, it felt great. We would hold the perpetrators accountable. We would bring the bodies home, even launching a quasi-military operation to do so.  We were throwing our weight around: talking super tough to Russia while other lily-livered leaders, like British Prime Minister David Cameron, were tweeting anaemically about \"meeting to establish the facts\".But four months later, what? The bodies – most of them anyway – haven't returned. No one has been held accountable. Forensic investigators have barely visited the crash site, which by now must be impossibly contaminated. No justice has been done. Last month Julie Bishop managed to get Vladmir Putin's \"assurance\" that he would help investigators access the crash site.  Which is pretty much what he assured us in July.  Oh, and we've just asked Russia to apologise. They said no.Don't blame the Abbott government for this. The truth is there is nothing it could have done. The problem is there never was. At no stage did we have any meaningful leverage over Russia. We had no meaningful imports to ban and no meaningful sanctions to impose. That's exactly why we were so free to shoot our mouth off: we had nothing much at stake. That this has achieved nothing concrete was merely inevitable. So, of course, there was no shirt-front – whatever that was meant to mean. The very idea was always fantasy. But it will not do to let Shorten trade on it as a \"diplomatic faux pas\".  It was Shorten, after all, who goaded Abbott to this belligerence. We forget that Shorten was sounding off on the fact that Putin was coming to Brisbane for the G20, raging that \"laying out the red carpet\" is not how you \"deal with an international bully\". \"Go on, Tony, sock him one,\" screamed the subtext.  \"What are you, a girly man?\"It was a cynical brand of opportunism for which Shorten has never been called to account.  He knew full well that the decision to receive Putin was not Abbott's, and that Australia had no power to prevent the visit. Shorten's rhetoric had nothing to do with the national interest. He cast a populist line and Abbott took the bait. Abbott is responsible for his own words, but let us not pretend the ridiculous posing is anything other than bipartisan.Perhaps that's because the posing is all we have. About the most galling fact about our world is that sometimes there are monstrous injustices for which we are powerless to seek redress. In such moments we frequently pretend otherwise. We roar our disapproval. We pledge results we simply cannot deliver. We do this, not because it changes anything material, but because this ritual anger is its own end. And that's what our raging towards Russia has ultimately been: an exercise in gesture politics.This is increasingly the truth that confronts our political leaders. Whatever power they possess, it seems to be less and less capable of dealing with what concerns us. Over a decade ago we promised to hunt down every last terrorist. Now the problem is bigger than ever despite the years of military action and ever toughening security legislation that was meant to solve it. The result, of course, will be more gestures of this kind, giving us at least the conviction that we're doing something. Last week we discovered just how severely tax-savvy multinational corporations were screwing us by hiding their profits in tax havens. We can tinker at this, but ultimately Luxembourg has more say in it than we do. This week we discovered the federal budget had something like a $51 billion shortfall thanks significantly to the fact that iron ore prices are dropping off. Joe Hockey disputes the figure, but no one disputes the concept. For this government as for its predecessor, massive holes are being punched in its revenue while it looks on helplessly. Meanwhile the US and China have just struck an emissions reduction agreement that, if China can be held to it, will likely mean a serious reduction in our coal exports. If our economic outlook just took a pummelling, it did so without our involvement. That's the point, really. We simply don't control such things any more.It's amazing how many of the current government's predicaments seem like ghosts of the previous government's ones. And how each opposition seems convinced that every problem is entirely within the hands of a competent government to solve, if only we had one. Sure, some policy responses to these problems are better than others. We could reform the tax system or close tax loopholes to make our revenue more reliable, for instance. It's not that we can do nothing at all. It's just that in so many cases we can do nothing hugely consequential. But it is ingrained in our political debate to pretend otherwise. Our loss of control seems matched only by our bluster. In cases like MH17, it's catharsis. In such moments the illusion of power matters more than the reality of it. This, it seems, is a characteristic of our age: as our power escapes the grasp of our governments, they become ever more occupied with the gestures that mask its absence. "], ["Insane, antisocial loners a new type of terrorist", "October 31, 2014", "173", " The dispiriting news feels like it's coming in a torrent. Canada suffers two terrorist attacks in a week. Another attack in New York, this one with an axe, wounds two police officers before the attacker is shot dead. Immediately you recall the Melbourne case of Abdul Numan Haider, whose weapon of choice was a knife, but whose story had the same ending.  Meanwhile, a Sydney teenager plays a starring role in two ISIL propaganda videos in a fortnight, while the man who apparently groomed and recruited him, Mohammad Ali Baryalei, is now very likely dead. This, you might feel, is encouraging until you consider that his symbolic pull is likely only to increase as a result of his \"martyrdom\".But pause for a moment and you notice something about this picture. We're a long way from all the talk of dirty bombs and nuclear weapons of the Bush-Cheney-Rumsfeld era. We're nowhere near planes smashing into skyscrapers. We're not even in the neighbourhood of bombs being detonated on buses and underground trains, or in nightclubs. This stuff is galling and tragic. It occasions the same public grieving and ceremony, but we're talking about something qualitatively different, here. For the moment at least, mass-casualty terrorism is off the agenda. \"Smash his head with a rock, or slaughter him with a knife, or run over him with your car,\" urged ISIL last month as it called upon Muslims to kill random Westerners. There's a kind of desperate crudeness, here: one that seems to have lowered its horizons. Today it's about low-casualty, mass-impact terrorism. But that impact is far more psychological than it is material.The point is not to dismiss this as trivial. It's serious, not least because it's clear that a few people have acted on ISIL's instructions. It's serious because, while mass-casualty attacks are clearly more devastating, they're also much harder to pull off. Rather, the point is to note that something has changed. Terrorism is evolving. And so are the terrorists.You see, they're dickheads now. David Leyonhjelm's description is a disarming one because it recasts these people as self-aggrandising amateurs. There's more than an element of truth to this. Zale Thompson's axe-wielding attack in New York lasted a mere seven seconds before he was shot. He was, by all accounts, an unemployed loner with a record of multiple arrests. In Canada, Michael Zehaf-Bibeau was living in a homeless shelter before he decided to open fire on the Parliament Building. This was a man with a crack cocaine habit, a suite of drug possession and theft episodes, and a history of mental illness. In this respect his story isn't so far from Baryalei's, which has more to do with cocaine, gambling and Kings Cross strip clubs than it does with advanced explosives training and a piercing political manifesto. He, too, has a history of mental illness, much like Khaled Sharrouf, who so infamously tweeted a picture of his son holding a severed head, and who was also diagnosed with schizophrenia.This isn't the way terrorism has tended to work.  For all our knee-jerk descriptions of terrorists as mad, psychopathic or otherwise psychologically disturbed, decades of research has now demonstrated the opposite: that despite their clearly abnormal behaviour, terrorists are overwhelmingly sane and psychologically normal. Nor have they tended to be antisocial loners. Terrorism has almost always been a group activity, carried out in cells that have strong bonds of solidarity between members. Certainly there have been \"lone wolves\" in history – some of them, such as the Unabomber, suffering from mental illness – but these have been exceptions to a well established rule.But ISIL is playing by different rules. Its reach amongst Westerners is clearly skewed towards converts and born-again Muslims, often with troubled pasts. It tends not to appeal as much to those with long-held, well established religious commitments. That's because ISIL isn't merely offering an ideology. Like all fundamentalisms, it's offering an identity: a chance for people to reimagine themselves and restart their lives by turning their back in the most radical fashion on everything they've left behind. What better way to prove you're free from the yoke of sin and drugs and sleaze than quite literally to take up arms against them? It's not just the violence. It's the illusion of purity and self-sacrifice that goes with it that is attractive.This is particularly potent in an online era. It is precisely the fact that ISIL is so devastatingly effective online that means it doesn't have to rely on the kind of group solidarity that has typically held terrorism together. This opens terrorism to people who previously would have been a liability. Someone who is mentally unstable or struggles to work with others is wholly unsuited to the kind of careful, secret planning that is so fundamental to professional terrorism. But no such concern applies when you're trying to unleash the kind of rudimentary, randomised mayhem ISIL is. Suddenly the lone wolf, which was once an odd curiosity, is an emerging trend that sits near the top of the list of every Western security agency's worries.Those agencies will respond with what they know: increased hard power. It's why we're so attracted to more counterterrorism laws and military intervention. We have this intuitive understanding that these things work. And sometimes, in the short term, they do. But at some point we'll have to recognise that even as we chalk up successes like killing senior terrorist figures, the problem only seems to grow. Who'd have thought 10  years ago that we'd be raising the terror threat level to its highest point in our history after Osama bin Laden had been killed?That happens because we're dealing with something that is deeply, irrevocably social. Eradicating it therefore becomes as complex as eradicating any social disease. Truth is we've never figured out how to solve those. We can't stop drug use.  We can't stop disaffection. We can't stop alienation. Not entirely, anyway. And perhaps we can't eradicate radicalisation, either, at least until the whole ghastly experiment of militant Islamism collapses under the weight of its nihilistic contradictions. But in the meantime, it won't be crushed by our sledgehammers. "], ["Burqa ban a political excuse for persecution", "October 3, 2014", "988", " Even before the embarrassing back-down there were problems. For starters, it's not a burqa. A burqa is that particularly Afghan garment, usually blue, with the mesh covering the eyes. The one you've seen on the news (or perhaps on Jacqui Lambie's Facebook page), but almost certainly never in Australia. We're talking about the niqab, common in the Gulf and worn by – my guess – a couple of hundred Australians. I have to guess, because we don't even bother with such basic research before we consider banning such things.It says everything that we can't even get the name right; that merely to be understood in the argument, you must get it wrong. Of itself, it's not a big deal, but it symbolises the calibre of the public conversation. It's as if we're demanding a pernicious, industrial-scale ignorance. As if we're proud of it. We'll tell these women what their clothing signifies. We'll tell them why they wear it. We'll even rename it for them if we want. These women will be deconstructed and reconstructed at our will, and without their involvement. These are the terms of the debate and the most influential voices will be the most ignorant.But ignorance is no barrier precisely because this debate really has nothing to do with the women being recast as some kind of problem. Strip it all back and they've done nothing to invite this. They aren't the ones charged with plotting \"demonstration killings\". They aren't the ones being busted carrying weapons or attacking police officers.  They are, however, the ones most often assaulted or abused on the street or on public transport. They're the ones whose freedom we try most to restrict. In short, they become the symbolic target for our rage; the avatar we choose to represent a generalised enemy, and the threat it poses. In this, we obey what seems a diabolically universal principle: that whatever the outrage, whatever the fear, and whatever the cause, it is women that must suffer first and most.So perhaps you'll forgive these women if they don't come out in droves to thank Senator Cory Bernardi for rescuing them from what he regards a \"shroud of oppression\" that \"represents the repressive domination of men over women\".Perhaps you'll understand they see something other than feminist concern in these words; that Bernardi might look to them a lot like Lord Cromer did to the Egyptian women he colonised in the 19th century.Cromer similarly decided Egyptian women needed emancipation, and that that they should therefore remove their veils. Meanwhile, back in England, he was the president of the Men's League for Opposing Woman Suffrage.Before the change of heart it was a burqa ban (see, even I'm doing it now) in Parliament House. The argument was about security, but it's a thin pretext. If you need to identify someone entering the building, it's dead easy to do: you take them aside to a private space and ask them to reveal their face for identification purposes. Then you subject them to the same screening as everyone else.In fact, we already do this sort of thing in airports and secure buildings with no fuss at all. The only reason there's a fuss now is that we've dreamt one up, as Prime Minister Tony Abbott's \"mountain over a molehill\" response suggests. I can find only one isolated example of an Australian using the anonymity of a niqab to commit a crime. By a man.This, of course, was enough for Bernardi to declare the niqab the emergent \"preferred disguised of bandits and ne'er do wells\", which must accordingly be banned. Not just in banks or Parliament, but everywhere. Very well then, let's get serious about this. I propose a ban on all disguises used by \"bandits\" anywhere, ever. Sorry kids, but Spider-Man's illegal now. Let's prosecute the CEO of K-Mart for providing material support to terrorism, or something. What are you, a weak-kneed apologist?No, the security discourse is mere rhetorical camouflage. Abbott's chief of staff Peta Credlin advised her party's anti-burqa brigade to mount their case in security terms – not because it is their primary concern, but because it was  most likely to succeed. If this looks like a solution in search of a problem, that's because the \"solution\" is the entire point.For Bernardi and Liberal backbencher George Christensen, who pushed it, the real goal is the total ban of the niqab in public. All else is pretext. Feminism doesn't work? Try security: whatever quasi-respectable way might open the door. It's the kind of argument that allows Coalition MPs such as the Nationals Darren Chester to argue that \"we're talking about national security; we're not talking about religion or what people wear\". Maybe that's true for Chester, but it clearly isn't for the MPs driving the cause.Now is when we find out what Team Australia really means. Now is when we discover if it's designed to unify a diverse nation or to demonise the socially unpopular.Attorney-General George Brandis has planted his flag in impeccably liberal style: \"I have no concerns with Muslims wearing the burqa and I don't have a preference either because frankly it's none of [my] business\". Abbott, too, has these instincts within him.It's often forgotten that back in 2006 when the Howard government was in the midst of an anti-veiling frenzy, it was he who wrote in the Liberal Party's journal that \"ripping away Muslim girls' scarves is not going to make them more 'Australian'. If anything, it's almost certain to make them feel more vulnerable and 'different' \", and that \"disparaging the religious symbols of Muslim Australians is at odds with our own best traditions\". But he's a leader now. Everything he says is for someone. The question now is: for whom is he speaking? Which team does he have in mind when he decided to share that he wishes niqabs \"weren't worn\"?Given, on his own testimony, no niqabi has ever entered Parliament House, he knew that any ban would be symbolic. Before the back-down, it was merely a matter of which message he wanted to send.The one that upholds \"our own best traditions\"? Or the one that tells a minority they aren't welcome in their own Parliament? Waleed Aly is a Fairfax columnist. He hosts Drive on ABC Radio National and is a lecturer in politics at Monash University. "], ["Seeking calm amid violence, fear and outrage", "September 18, 2014", "362", " It's the sheer randomness of it that makes it so terrifying. The idea that the victim would be utterly generic: not a politician or a soldier, but a random person. This person would be an abstraction, really. They are everyone precisely because they are no one in particular. What would matter is the image. The video had to be made, the event had to be broadcast. This matters more than the killing itself.Now will come the courtroom arguments about whether this is a serious plot or empty, youthful bravado, but they will have no public purchase. Terrorism is all about the fear, the anxiety, the outrage. It's nothing without it. And what can scare or outrage us more than the thought of ISIL within?And it's that thought that perhaps has the most to teach us in Australia. ISIL is not simply a group to be vanquished. It is not a fixed, finite, collection of people we can somehow control or eradicate. For us in Australia, it's most dangerously a symbol: a brand a young man from Sydney can claim for himself; a flag in which he can wrap himself, and his proposed victim. For all its pretensions to statehood, the key thing is that it's anything but. It exists in the mind as much as on land.So it's not the kind of thing we can simply destroy with military force. Modern terrorism doesn't work that way. We keep killing \"senior figures\" in terrorist groups – indeed, it's more than three years since we killed the most senior of them all – and nothing substantive changes. We tried to smash al-Qaeda. It fragmented, then morphed into a mass movement not truly under anyone's direct control, with Osama bin Laden mostly a symbolic figurehead. Then it begat ISIL.This yields a devilish problem: namely, that we are trying to confront a threat that exists nowhere in particular, and anywhere in theory. We can't destroy that. Not in the short term and not with the kind of conventional force the state has at its disposal. What we can do is manage it. Arrest, prosecute, convict. The good news is, we're good at that. The bad news is that this isn't a cure. It's the (certainly necessary) treatment of symptoms.Long-term, it's about us. It's about how resilient we are as a society, and how focused we are in our response. There is one very clear way in which this alleged plot can succeed, even if it is never carried out: that we become so emotionally manipulated, so provoked, that we end up helplessly polarised. That becomes a problem because a symbol as ghastly as ISIL can only prosper in a febrile atmosphere.\"Right now is a time for calm,\" urged NSW police commissioner Andrew Scipione. \"We don't need to whip this up.\"He's entirely right, but even as he says this he must be asking himself a very scary question: is that going to be possible?Waleed Aly is a Fairfax columnist and a lecturer in politics at Monash University. "], ["What would success in Iraq look like?", "September 5, 2014", "196", " If we're going to get involved once more in a military campaign in Iraq, there is a question we simply must answer: what exactly will success look like? It's perhaps the single most catastrophically ignored question of the post-9/11 era. It's the question we never answered in defining the War on Terror. And it's the question we never answered (or even asked) before the disaster that was the 2003 invasion of Iraq, which is precisely why we had no workable plan for the post-Saddam nation. That's why we ended up with the ridiculous \"Mission Accomplished\" spectacle about eight years before American troops finally left. And as we head inexorably back into the Iraqi vortex, it is a question I fear we won't answer yet again. The mission as defined so far seems simple enough: to perform the humanitarian act of preventing a genocide. And let me be clear: that is about the noblest human endeavour there is. The trouble is that it's too general to be an adequate answer. We need to know in far more precise terms what that means, what we will need to see before we can be certain the genocide has been averted, exactly when we can say \"Mission Accomplished' and actually mean it. Does it, for example, mean ISIL is confined to a particular area? If so, which areas? Does it mean that the groups ISIL is so keen to exterminate will be adequately armed to defend themselves – kind of like the Iraqi military we're meant already to have trained? Does it mean ISIL's total elimination? If so, how exactly do we plan to achieve that almost certainly impossible task? And if not, what concrete circumstances will allow us to say with confidence that ISIL's genocidal project won't simply resume the moment Western forces leave? Are we proposing – or even prepared – to stay involved indefinitely?  Does our objective ultimately require the creation of a strong, inclusive Iraqi state, and if so, how do we create this given we've failed miserably on this score for 11 years? Oh, and if we're arming Kurdish militias now to fight ISIL, what's our plan in the entirely conceivable event they decide they'd really rather have their own state separate from Iraq?  How do we feel about the prospect of a civil war, which, incidentally might just provide the kind of fertile environment for terrorist and insurgent groups like ISIL to revive themselves? If we cannot answer these sorts of questions definitively, then even the most morally compelling military interventions are liable to mutate into something else.  A modest, preventative humanitarian campaign can quickly become a sprawling, ill-defined mess. Indeed, you can already see the signs of escalation. \"Our objective is to degrade and destroy ISIL so that it's no longer a threat,\" declared Barack Obama this week, which is a very far cry from the narrower aim of genocide-prevention.  If Obama is serious about crushing ISIL, then he can't do it merely with air strikes in Iraq. He'll have to take his soldiers into Syria, which is the wellspring of so much of ISIL's force. Is this something he is seriously contemplating? Are we planning to fight alongside Bashar al-Assad now after three years of calling for his fall? Is Obama  prepared to resort to ground troops when it becomes clear he can't take out an amorphous terrorist organisation from the sky?  Precisely what strategy the Obama administration has in mind is, at this point, unknowable. What we do know is that whatever military campaign America ultimately settles on, and whatever it is the Americans ask of us, we'll provide it.  We've shown already our involvement is elastic. What began as humanitarian aid drops has expanded to providing weapons to Kurdish militias, and – Tony Abbott acknowledges – might now extend to providing our fanciest planes for airstrikes on ISIL targets. There are no clear, non-negotiable limits at this point; nothing we can definitively rule out.  There are merely reassurances that certain specific requests have not been made.  But that rather sidesteps the crucial question: what will we do when they are? I don't doubt the urgent, visceral humanitarian concern that's driving us here.  That voice from within that screams \"do something!\" – I hear it, too. I don't even believe military intervention is necessarily wrong in this case, in the way it plainly was in 2003. There is a genuine threat to confront, the Iraqi government is asking for this military support, and we may even have a responsibility under international law to protect the vulnerable. As a matter of principle I'm perfectly open to the idea that a military campaign is necessary in a way that was simply never true in 2003.  But wars don't remain matters of principle for long. They generate real, concrete, irreversible and unpredictable consequences. Indeed the current disaster is one such consequence. And the fact that some manner of intervention might be necessary doesn't mean the same is true for whatever intervention we might happen to dream up. No, our objectives, our measures of success and our overarching strategy need to be more than noble. They need to be as precise and concrete as those consequences we're about to unleash. Right now, they're not. We can rectify that, but there are questions to answer, and I'm not sure we're even asking them. "], ["Citizenship: how Zaky Mallah became an object of hate to justify government's tough talk", "June 25, 2015", "268", " I have a simple question: do we want terrorists to be in this country or not? For the \"no\" case, I give you Tony Abbott, who so desperately does \"not want terrorists loose on our streets\" that he has released a bill to snatch dual nationals' Australian citizenship away if they've gone to fight with Islamic State. In truth, it does massively more than that, but the central intent seems clear: to ensure terrorists who have left the country can't get back in.For the \"yes\" case, I give you …Tony Abbott, whose government has cheerfully cancelled the passports of something like 80 Australians with designs on leaving. If we assume the government thinks they're terrorists, then we're actively forcing these people to run loose on our streets, rather than Syria's where, given Islamic State's current strategy with Western recruits, they'd most likely be killed quickly as cannon fodder.Meanwhile we've undergone a whole legislative process to create new criminal offences of being in the wrong place without an excuse. Remember the no-go zones? It's a scheme that more or less assumes people are coming back, presumably to be prosecuted. And yet, when shadow attorney-general Mark Dreyfus suggested this would be a good thing, suddenly he was \"rolling out the red carpet for terrorists\".All of which raises the question: if the main game was always to institute what Abbott this week described as a modern form of \"banishment\", why all this legislation for the laying of red carpet last year? Wouldn't that banishment be your starting point, from which everything else is proceeds?There's a confusion here we're serenely ignoring. And there's a reason for that: we're not on a search for consistency. We're not committed to a series of carefully worked out principles that we're now seeking to apply. We don't even have a functioning theory of what it is that exacerbates or diminishes the threat of terrorism.There's a bit of talk about working with communities and promoting social cohesion, then a dollop of bellicose rhetoric about Muslim leaders not condemning terrorism enough and not meaning it when they do, which swiftly trashes whatever community goodwill was meant to have been accumulated. There's lots of talk about evil death cults which describes something, but goes nowhere near explaining it.Meanwhile there's lots – and lots – of aggressive posturing that seems to regard any resistance, even in the form of the constitution, as vaguely seditious. The point here that can barely still be called implicit, is that it is nearly impossible to go too far in this fight. It's the logic on Guantanamo, writ small.Thus we end up with a collection of policies seemingly at odds with one another, unified only by their conspicuous toughness. Right now, that's the only form of consistency you need. You can say you're acting on the advice of experts like Bret Walker, the former National Security Legislation Monitor, and then when he says you're misrepresenting him, tell him he wouldn't really know and plough on regardless. None of it matters. Indeed, nothing matters except the thought that we're holding the biggest sledgehammer we can find; the catharsis of smashing things. We're riding visceral emotion here.So on Monday, when Zaky Mallah emerged to dump wildfire on the conversation, his timing was impeccable. This was the week these citizenship laws were finally to surface. These laws raise issues that are not only obvious, but utterly foundational: the rule of law, the expansion of executive power, the extraordinarily loose pretexts on which the most seminal right we have – citizenship – could simply be extinguished. In some ways, Mallah was the perfect person to ask the question. He's a man acquitted of terrorism charges – which is to say he is, officially speaking, not a terrorist – whose citizenship the government would gleefully dissolve if it had the power. On this issue, he's the very embodiment of the difference between law and politics.But in this environment, and given his penchant for incendiary remarks, he's none of those things. He is instead an emblem of outrage; the symbolic enemy through whom every war can be fought (including as it happens, a very tired culture war against the ABC that has finally found its way to the News Limited tabloids equating it with Islamic State).Mallah clearly thinks he's raising issues of principle, but a figure like him can only ever smother them. He's become the licence to emote; the cover that means we need never look at boring abstract issues like the separation of powers. The truth is that for all the outrage from government figures this week, Mallah is a gift to them: the object of hate that justifies almost any conceivable measure and makes their aggression a virtue. Who can resist a \"tough\" policy when Zaky Mallah is standing right there?This is about more than the politicisation of terrorism. That, after all, is an old custom, which only runs aground when you get it horribly wrong – as the Howard government did in 2007 when it tried to parade Mohamed Haneef around as its prize terrorism catch.Rather this is about legitimising our most thoughtless instincts and debasing even the most sober criticism. Watch. From here, it's not just Zaky Mallah who will be radical. It will be everything he seemed to think he was raising. It will be the notion of due process. It will be any suspicion of government overreach. And it will be any Muslim voice who dares question our counter-terrorism settings or who argues government action is further alienating young Muslims and thereby increasing radicalisation. Say that and you're practically a member of Islamic State. Just like that guy on Q&A. "], ["James Foley beheading baits America to intervene", "August 22, 2014", "249", " \"Without these videos and photos and firsthand experience, you can't really tell the world how bad it might be.\"  When you consider that these are the words of James Foley, the very same American journalist whose own brutish beheading at the hands of ISIS was this week filmed and posted online, it's about as chillingly foreboding as it gets.  Foley wanted us to know the horrors of Syria.  He devoted the last stage of his life to it.  But it is by his own horrific death that he has most shockingly told us how bad things might be.Now comes the search for meaning; for what this horror signifies.  The incorrigible extremism of ISIS, certainly.  But that much has already been proven at length as it has tried to perpetrate a genocide against local Yazidis, and routinely beheaded Christians.  And yet there is something different about this development that deserves our attention: something that reveals not merely ISIS's barbarism, but its weakness.When you are beheading locals, and stringing up the severed heads for public display, you're clearly doing more than killing people.  ISIS's rampant violence has thus far not merely been a campaign of ethnic cleansing and genocide, but one more broadly of intimidation and control.  Certainly, it has wanted to exterminate non-Muslims.  But it has also been keen to eliminate Shiite Muslims and or even Sunnis it deems insufficiently obedient.  It has been trying desperately to assert authority over the territory it claims to control. The violence was public and local, with the very clear aim of gaining total compliance.This was ISIS in Jacobin mode; its post-revolutionary Régime de la Terreur.  In this respect at least ISIS was attempting to live up to its pretentious new brand: not as a group aspiring to a state, but as a state already achieved. Hence, \"Islamic State\", a rebranding that has always been dubious and was from the very start rejected even by its extreme Islamist cousins.  But at least it could plausibly lay claim to a serious chunk of territory straddling the Iraq-Syria border.  This was a movement on the march, whose advance had proven irresistible.Now there is resistance.  On the ground this has come in the form of the Iraqi military and especially Kurdish militias enjoying perhaps their first ever serious wave of international support.  From the air it has taken the form of US strikes, that have clearly pushed ISIS back from the Kurdish city of Erbil, and helped deliver the strategically crucial Mosul Dam into Kurdish hands.  For the moment, the Americans are pretty chuffed: \"their morale is suffering, their competency and capacity has been damaged\" declared the Pentagon press secretary this week.This could, of course, be the Obama administration's own spin.  But James Foley's execution suggests there is plenty of truth to it. This is not a local act of intimidation intended to establish and consolidate the power of a fledgling, self-declared state.  This is a global broadcast intended to draw a reaction from a global audience.  And it is this fact alone – far more than the literal content of the threats ISIS is making – that speaks volumes, here.  This week ISIS left behind its Jacobin pretensions and returned to its al-Qaedaist nature. It went from Terror (which is what the state does), to terrorism (which is what the militant without a state does).Thus are ISIS's motives abundantly plain.  It is doing what terrorist groups must do: recruiting.  And the best way to do that is to agitate and provoke; to radicalise the environment.  On this score, ISIS is treading an extremely well-worn path.  The aim is to put on a show of commitment and strength; something so confident and shocking that it will impress potential recruits. That's why Foley had to be humiliated before being killed.  It's why his death had to be gruesome.  It's a message calculated to give young radicalised Muslims a sense of power.  Indeed, we've seen this before – about a decade ago, from Abu Musab al-Zarqawi's al-Qaeda in Iraq.  As it happened, al-Zarqawi's campaign ended abruptly because it was hopelessly counterproductive.  It repulsed the very people it was intended to impress, and the al-Qaeda leadership pulled al-Zarqawi into line.  ISIS, as is frequently noted, is a more extreme incarnation of al-Qaeda, but it is hard to believe it would pursue this if it believed the practice would still be self-defeating.  So it must have reason to believe it will work differently this time.That reason is most likely that it is operating in radically different circumstances.  Ten years ago the US invasion was young and the carnage was fresh.  America's presence was a major radicalising force in itself, which had energised jihadists all over the world.  For al-Qaeda to behead civilians on film was merely for it to be gratuitous, and to compromise whatever moral appeal it claimed for itself.  But now, America has left.  Its present military reprise is very narrow and limited, nothing like the scale of shock and awe. Moreover it appears determined to keep it that way.That doesn't work for ISIS.  It needs America.  More to the point, it needs American intervention on a much grander scale.  However much it protests that it wants Obama to cease air strikes, it plainly seeks the opposite: to provoke the American public with something impossible to ignore, something so grotesque that it demands retaliation.  ISIS wants the American public screaming for Obama to escalate. It's about the oldest terrorist tactic there is.  Provoke overreaction, provide a magnet for radicalisation, swell the ranks and watch the cycle of violence unfold.  Indeed, this is precisely the story of the past decade or so.  James Foley's murder is about whether or not that will be the story of the next one. "], ["Abbott's 18C puzzle: linking terror and free speech raises interesting political questions", "August 8, 2014", "284", " It’s beginning to feel a lot like Christmas. Not in the joy and tinsel and presents kind of way. More in the manufactured-panic-about-a-war-on-Christmas kind of way. Are you familiar with this annual ritual? Some kindergarten or other decides not to hold a nativity play, or to replace its Christmas party with some generic “end-of-year” fare and then it’s on: political correctness has gone mad, and non-Christian minorities – namely Muslims – are holding good, decent, Christmas-loving Australians to ransom. Our culture is being sacrificed as an offering to a minority that doesn’t know its place.All this came rushing back to me this week as the Abbott government announced it was dropping its proposed amendments to the Racial Discrimination Act. The announcement wasn’t altogether surprising, but the context for it was. Suddenly section 18C would be left alone as a figleaf for Muslims; a kind of transfer fee for their recruitment to “Team Australia”. Consider how that looks if you believe – as presumably the government still does – this section is an egregious attack on free speech. Apparently we must continue to live under its yoke to appease Muslims in the hope that they’ll help us fight terrorism. We’re being held to ransom again. Muslims are the Grinch who stole freedom.The truth, of course, is that Muslims are largely peripheral to both issues. I don’t think I’ve met a single Muslim – or indeed a member of any other religious minority – who could care less about public Christmassy-ness. And whilst I have met Muslims who were unimpressed by the government’s plans for the Racial Discrimination Act, it seems an unusual red line for them to draw given that Muslims aren’t even protected by it. The law doesn’t regard Muslims as a racial group. So, whatever it is section 18C prevents you from saying about Aborigines or Asians or Jews, you can go right ahead and say it about Muslims. That’s exactly why Victoria introduced laws specifically targeting religious vilification: because the Racial Discrimination Act has nothing to say about it.So, it’s already started on talkback radio. But with any luck it won’t stick because the Abbott government’s political calculations here are so transparent. The fight against 18C was widely unpopular and politically costly. Thus did the government become horribly entangled, desperately needing a way to extricate itself. For a time it sought to do this by politely ignoring the issue, burying it beneath a process of reviewing public submissions and considering revisions.  But this wasn’t really a solution. Public impressions had been well set, and the government was now associated with the proposal, whether or not it was actively pursuing it. It needed somehow to dissociate itself without being seen simply to have dumped its policy. So now it is dumped as a counter-terrorism strategy. It’s an audacious move that relies on the idea that once any proposal is presented as a security measure, it is considerably more difficult to oppose. In truth, it’s a bit too audacious, even if it looked neat enough on paper.The real trouble is that it takes the Abbott government to all sorts of places I very much doubt it wants to go. If 18C has been preserved in the interests of “national unity”, is the government admitting that its promise to amend it was divisive?  If so, what does it think of the kind of rhetoric that violates 18C? Does that compromise national unity, too?  Surely it is worse to engage in racial discrimination yourself than merely to propose legalising it out of a commitment to liberal freedoms. Surely it is more divisive to be a bigot than to stand for someone’s right to bigoted expression. Does that mean that those who breach the Racial Discrimination Act are undermining Team Australia?To draw a specific connection between 18C and counter-terrorism requires a long bow. But the mere attempt to do so has intriguing philosophical consequences. By presenting divisive politics as a security concern, the government is implicitly accepting the social dimensions of terrorism. It suggests that terrorism gathers around feelings of alienation and social exclusion; that intelligence flows best from communities that feel valued and included rather than surveilled, suspected and interrogated. This, as it happens, accords with the best research we have on the psychology of radicalisation and effective counter-terrorism policing. It accords far less well, however, with the way that governments tend to talk about terrorism. Is the Abbott government a devotee of this approach?  If so, does it intend to reinstate the Countering Violent Extremism program – and in particular its grants for community programs aimed at “Building Community Resilience” – that it let lapse in June? Is it reconsidering the regime of preventative detention and control orders? You know, the ones that were so abused in the Mohammed Haneef case, and which clearly spook many Muslims who fear their arbitrary use?  The ones that the government’s own legislative monitor recommended be abolished because they are “not effective, not appropriate and not necessary”? Or do the social dimensions of terrorism somehow begin and end with the Racial Discrimination Act? Certainly seems an odd place to end. But then, unless you focus on the political manoeuvring, it’s an odder place to start. "], ["MH17, Gaza and the value of human life", "July 25, 2014", "605", " I’ve been thinking a lot lately about the value of human life. About the lives so cheaply lost on MH17. About the anger and grief this tragedy has unleashed. About the sense of sacredness and solemn ceremony that followed it. There’s something cathartic about all this. That we mark this with ritual public grieving tells us that these lives – and therefore our own lives – are sanctified; that their termination is an almost blasphemous violation. On some level this reassures us, which is probably why we pore over news coverage of such events, seizing on small harrowing details and the personal stories of the victims.But I’ve also been thinking a lot about why it is these lives particularly that have earned such a response. The more I heard journalists and politicians talk about how 37 Australians were no longer with us, the stranger it began to sound. Something of that magnitude happens just about every week on our roads, for instance. In the last week for which we have official data, 29 people were killed this way. The youngest was two. We held no ceremonies, and we had no public mourning of the fact that they, too, were no longer with us.Why? I don’t ask critically, because I’m as unmoved by the road toll as anyone. But it’s surely worth understanding how it is we decide which deaths matter, and which don't; which ones are galling and tragic, and which ones are mere statistics. We tell ourselves we care about the loss of innocent life as though it’s a cardinal, unwavering principle, but the truth is we rationalise the overwhelming majority of it. What does that tell us about ourselves?Here, the most obvious counterpoint is the nightmare unfolding in Gaza. As I write this, nearly 600 people – overwhelmingly civilians a third of whom are children – have been killed. By the time this goes to print, that number will be redundant. There’s grief, there’s anger and there’s some international hand-wringing, but nothing that compares with the urgency and rage surrounding MH17, even if there is twice the human cost.If you take your cues from social media, on which this comparison is being relentlessly drawn, the reason is simple: Palestinians are not rich Westerners, and so their lives simply don’t matter. No doubt there’s some truth to this: humans are tribal animals, and we’re as tribal in death as we are in life. But it’s not an entirely satisfactory explanation because it comes from people who would likely exempt themselves from this rule. And yet those same people have almost certainly grieved comparatively little over the thousands of South Sudanese killed in the past six months, or the 1.5 million to have been displaced. Should we conclude they value African lives less than Palestinian ones? It’s not merely a matter of cultural affinity. Consider the Egyptian press, which has wholeheartedly embraced the Israeli offensive. “Sorry Gazans, I cannot support you until you rid yourselves of Hamas,” wrote Adel Nehaman in Al-Watan. He was comprehensively outdone by Al-Ahram’s Azza Sami who tweeted “Thank you Netanyahu, and God give us more men like you to destroy Hamas”. Then she prayed for the deaths of all “Hamas members, and everyone who loves Hamas”. Meanwhile, television presenter Tawfik Okasha urged Egyptians to “forget Gaza”, adding for colour that “Gazans are not men” because they don’t “revolt against Hamas”. That, presumably includes the hospital patients or the kids playing football on the beach who have been bombed in the past week or so.This is about as thorough a dehumanisation of Gazans as you’ll find anywhere in the world. Israel’s media doesn’t even come close. And this in a country where the Palestinian cause has been a kind of social glue for decades. But that’s what happens when the sanctity of life meets the power of politics. For the Egyptian media – now effectively a propaganda arm of the government – Gaza merely represents a chance to attack the Muslim Brotherhood, from which Hamas emerged. It doesn’t matter who dies. It doesn’t matter how many. What matters is that their lives – and especially their deaths – can be used in the service of the story they are so desperate to tell.And that, I fear, is a universal principle. It is not merely the death of innocents that moves us, even in very large numbers. It is the circumstances of it that matter. We decide which deaths to mourn, which to ignore, which to celebrate, and which to rationalise on the basis of what story we want them to tell. Palestinian deaths matter more than Sudanese ones if you want to tell a story of Israeli aggression. Israeli deaths matter more than Palestinian ones if you want to tell a story of Hamas terrorism. Asylum seeker deaths at sea matter more than those on land if you want tell a story about people smuggling. But a death in detention trumps all if your story is about government brutality. And a death from starvation matters if you want to tell a story about global inequality – which so few people do. Everyone will insist they’re merely giving innocent human lives their due. And that’s true but only in the most partial sense. These are political stories driven by political commitments.MH17 allowed us to mourn and to rage because it delivered a story we were well prepared to tell. It’s easy to rage when the plot is one of Russian complicity, roguishness and cover-up. And frankly, Russia deserves the whack it’s getting for its handling of the aftermath. But in my most naive moments I hope for a world where the value of human life is universal enough that we can outrage ourselves; where we can tell the stories we don’t particularly want to; the stories in which we are neither the heroes nor the victims, but the guilty. That’s what we’re asking of Russia. One day someone mourning no less than we are will ask it of us. "], ["Tony Abbott's harsh treatment of asylum seekers is the same old story", "July 11, 2014", "438", " Occasionally you have to pause to take stock of just how bizarre Australia’s asylum seeker debate has become. In summary, it works like this: the Coalition implements a policy that is mostly Labor’s while pretending it is doing something so uniquely tough that no one else could possibly be so courageous. Labor, meanwhile, objects because that’s what oppositions do, while trying delicately to avoid criticising the very thing it has unleashed. The mainstream public responds, in poll after poll, with a mix of approval and bloodlust. Some call for even harsher measures though it is difficult to imagine what that would mean. Operation Sovereign Slaughter, perhaps?  Events might punctuate this story, but they do not truly alter it. There’s a death or suicide in detention here, and a High Court intervention there. These matter, but they don’t Matter. Nothing evolves, nothing is reset. Whatever talk there might be that the Abbott government this week encountered its “children overboard” moment overlooks the fact that that episode did nothing to damage Howard’s fortunes, and that whatever demonisation of asylum seekers it might have embodied, the tradition is clearly flourishing. That’s why reports of detainees’ attempted suicides are seen not as tragic signs of unbearable mental pain, but as a cynical political strategem; dismissed as merely rank “blackmail”.  So for all the incredulity, all the outrage, all the lawyering that this week has produced, it’s worth realising that we hardly crossed an intolerable threshold. At least not if that means we did something far beyond what we’ve done before. Perhaps the most confronting fact in all this is that whatever it is we did to those Sri Lankan boat people, there was very little that was new about it.  Let’s begin with the thought that by sending asylum seekers into the arms of the Sri Lankan navy we’re returning them to their torturers. It’s true that Sri Lanka’s human rights record is poor on this point. Indeed, it was bad enough for Canada and India to boycott the Commonwealth summit Sri Lanka hosted last November. It’s also true that, particularly in the case of Tamils, there are substantial grounds for believing they are in danger of being tortured. And it’s therefore an abundantly plain violation of the single most basic tenet of the Refugee Convention.  But it’s also true that we’ve done this before. Lots. We’ve sent people back to the Taliban to be killed for years. And in the case of Sri Lanka, we’ve returned more than 1000 people. Only it was the previous Labor government that did it. Indeed Chris Bowen, then Immigration Minister, was proud of the fact. He’d call these returns “steps forward” because those are the terms of our public conversation. It’s not a success when we resettle someone fleeing persecution. It’s a success when we manage not to.  The difference in Labor’s case was that the returns Bowen was celebrating were voluntary. Faced with the prospect of detention in Nauru or Papua New Guinea, these people decided to go home. Scott Morrison’s latest episode has seen them forcibly handed over to Sri Lanka. And at first blush, this seems a significant difference. But it’s far less significant than it appears.  That’s because in both cases, there was no assessment process worthy of the name. We now know the present government is doing it by teleconference, asking four preliminary questions before rejecting them. It is this practice, as much as anything, that has the government sweating it out in the High Court right now. But again, it’s hardly new. These days it carries the mocking name of “enhanced screening”, but it used to be called “screening out” and some version of it has been around for decades.  It’s about the most cynical way there is of getting around the law. You don’t even wait for an asylum application, you just press ahead with a cursory informal interview. If they don’t say all of the right things about why they’re there, you simply tell them they aren’t eligible and encourage them to give up. The trouble is that they typically have no idea why they’re being interviewed, so often don’t understand they are being asked to make their case.  And it’s what they don’t understand that makes this work a treat. You don’t tell them this isn’t a formal assessment. You certainly don’t tell them that they have a right to go ahead and apply anyway. And for God’s sake you don’t tell them they have a right to a lawyer. You just daze them with bureaucratic smoke and hope they’ll be confused and disappointed enough to go away. Usually they do, probably because they’re under the false impression their application has been rejected. Suddenly, Labor’s returns don’t look nearly so voluntary.  This, you’d think, is crying out for a High Court challenge. And here we are. But even on that score, we’ve been here before. The challenge never concludes because the government simply settles out of court. That’s exactly what happened last year, and it may well happen again this time if the government decides simply to take this latest boatload of asylum seekers somewhere else, making the High Court case moot.  It’s entirely possible these people are economic migrant and not refugees, as both major parties variously claim. Indeed it’s more likely in the case of Sinhalese boat people than, say, the boats that come from Indonesia. But the point is we don’t know because we determinedly don’t assess them. It’s a total subversion of the refugee system, but it’s a bipartisan subversion, which is why Labor’s only real attack is that the Abbott government should be more transparent. Fair enough. But what if it were? What could it say that wouldn’t sound remarkably familiar? "], ["Jailing of Peter Greste in Egypt reveals principles are the first casualty in the war on terror", "June 27, 2014", "109", " Let’s begin by stating the embarrassingly obvious: Peter Greste’s seven-year prison term in Egypt is an outrage. This wasn’t Kafka. It was worse than that. Not only was Greste clueless about his supposed crime – his prosecutors were. At one point they played the film clip of Gotye’s Somebody That I Used to Know in the courtroom with no explanation whatsoever. That’s the kind of thing you can call evidence when the result is predetermined. In those circumstances you might as well entertain yourselves. And it really is a cracker of a film clip.But now let’s state the less obvious: this wasn’t the political fix it might first appear. Today’s Egypt has much in common with Hosni Mubarak’s one, but it is not exactly the same. The current President, Abdel Fattah al-Sisi, does not control the judiciary in the same direct way as Mubarak did.This judiciary is independent in a fashion. It’s just that lots of its members are more interested in politics than in evidence. And on this issue, the court’s politics happen to match those of al-Sisi. Both have a deep, visceral, insatiable hatred for the Muslim Brotherhood. That’s why neither blinked as they invoked death sentences for Brotherhood members literally by the hundred – also without anything approximating a close examination of the evidence. Peter Greste is neither the first, nor the most unfortunate victim of this system.The point is that this is not the iron will of a dictator. This attitude is now socialised. That’s why these events are, by and large, acceptable to the Egyptian people whose media has been in full-blown propaganda mode since Mohamed Mursi was thrown out of office. That propaganda holds that the Brotherhood is a terrorist organisation posing some kind of existential threat to Egypt, that al-Sisi is barely short of sainthood, and anyone who protests his power or is otherwise critical of his government either supports or sympathises with terrorists. It works partly because the Brotherhood proved so toxic and divisive in power, partly because terrorism has become a real problem particularly in the Sinai, and partly because this narrative is so relentlessly repeated with no effective counterpoint.Greste’s problem is simply that he works for al-Jazeera – which the Egyptian regime deems to be a mouthpiece for the Brotherhood. He has every reason to protest that he was merely reporting the news, but that necessarily means exposing some of the regime’s excesses and in Egypt that’s enough to make you a lying, terrorist supporter. And that’s exactly what the charges were: supporting the Brotherhood and spreading false news.All of which should lead us to stop and realise just how astonishing it is that we find ourselves here. Who would have thought, when Egypt was in the throes of its revolutionary fervour, when its people had apparently vanquished a dictator with an irresistible cry for democracy, that its people would so soon approve of this farcical, authoritarian injustice? And who would have guessed – say, 10 years ago – that the Western world would be livid enough to demand the political overturning of the judiciary for the sake of some al-Jazeera journalists?Al-Jazeera! Once upon a time not so very long ago, it was Western politicians – like Donald Rumsfeld – describing them as the “mouthpiece of al-Qaeda”. And it was their propagandists – like Bill O’Reilly –  brandin it a terrorist organisation that shouldn't be allowed in America. Last year he even warned its anchors that \"they behead you\" if you \"misbehave\". “Sure,” you retort, “but these are just words – not the imprisonment of journalists after a sham trial”.  And that’s true. But it probably doesn’t mean much to Sami al-Hajj, the al-Jazeera cameraman who was locked up in Guantanamo Bay for six years without any trial at all – even a sham one – before the Bush administration decided there was nothing to charge him with. Greste was held in solitary confinement. If you believe al-Hajj’s lawyer, he was physically and sexually abused.In those days al-Jazeera’s main crime was that it broadcast statements from Osama bin Laden to which they had gained exclusive access – which is to say that it broadcast what any news organisation would regard as news. That was al-Jazeera’s argument then, in exactly the way it is its argument now. In both cases it’s an argument with force, but nowhere near the force of Rumsfeldian labels like \"terrorist sympathiser\" or as the Egyptian media has taken to calling Greste and his colleagues (among others), the “Marriott terror cell”.This is what the threat of terrorism does to us. It suspends our rationality. Terrorism is perhaps the most emotive form of politics humans have, which is why it is defined not by the causes it serves, but by the emotion – terror – it evokes. Once we are convinced of the threat there is almost no principle that can survive it, no matter how civilised we think we are. Due process, open justice, privacy, the presumption of innocence; it’s all up for grabs if we’re pushed far enough. We’ll shred the Magna Carta if we feel we have to. Just look at what we did to habeas corpus. Or better yet, ask Mohamed Haneef.That’s where Egypt is right now: in a place without any real principles; a place of pure politics, where the only thing that matters is power and the complete destruction of the enemy – in this case the Muslim Brotherhood. There will be guilt by association and there will be collateral damage, and it will be serenely ignored by anyone who shares that goal.  We can be outraged by this – even if we didn’t much care until an Australian got caught up in it. We can even deride Egypt, as Peter Reith recently did, as “a very nasty totalitarian police state” with “a pretend judiciary” – even if that has been true for 30 years during which time we were happy to call Egypt our friend. But if we look hard enough, we’ll recognise there is something all too human about this monstrous injustice. We’ll see this is what happens to a nation that has terrified itself. If even durable, mature, successful democracies like us or the United States can trade in our principles for hysteria on occasion, what hope did a dysfunctional nation with no real political culture like Egypt have?Waleed Aly is an Age columnist. He hosts Drive on ABC Radio National and is a lecturer in politics at Monash University. "], ["Western invasion paved way for Iraq's terror crisis", "June 13, 2014", "259", " Over 11 years ago we entered a war of choice on a pretext that was always dubious and proved ultimately false. There are several reasons we did this: a messianic belief in the democratisation of the Middle East; a desire to project Western power and install a compliant ruler in Saddam Hussein’s place; in Australia’s case, pursuing the US alliance. But beneath them all lies one essential conceit: we did this because we thought we could. Perhaps some of our soldiers, and multiples more Iraqi civilians would die, but we figured that would be the limit of the fallout. At the very least we assumed our power would be enhanced. At our most delirious we might have believed we’d leave the world a better place.Indeed that idea hasn’t gone away. When relentless mass uprisings in the Middle East began toppling dictators and promising democracy, the Iraq War’s apologists rushed to claim credit for the change. Saddam’s defeat had unleashed a wave of democratic fervour and a belief in the transience of rulers, so they reasoned. But today, as democracy in Egypt descends into farce and the uprisings in Syria have exploded into the most horrific civil war, this is perhaps not a legacy we should wish to claim. And now, there’s Iraq itself. Specifically Mosul, which this week fell to the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). Barely a decade after we set out to save the world, terrorists rule one of Iraq’s major cities. “We can’t beat them. We can’t,” says an Iraqi police officer. “They are well trained in street fighting and we’re not. We need a whole army to drive them out of Mosul.” Which might at least sound possible if it weren’t for the army colonel who explained that we’ve just witnessed “a total collapse of the security forces”. This is quite a spectacular step backwards.The invasion of Iraq happened in strange times, about 18 months after the Twin Towers fell and when security was about hard military power and little else. Shock. Awe. President Bush’s original name for the war in Afghanistan gives us a good sense of the mood: Operation Infinite Justice. Justice is about balance and measure, not the excesses of infinity. Infinite Justice is the kind of thing you come up with when you think it is impossible to be too forceful; when you think justice subsists in bombing places to rubble.As a result, we never truly bothered with trifling matters like sociology. Iraq was a theatre of domination and triumph – of missions accomplished. We scarcely noticed it was in fact a complicated society with significance to people well beyond its borders. By the time we discovered Sunnis and Shiites it was all a bit late. We had on our hands a full-scale, international insurgency.And the truth is, we never really defeated it. Indeed the invasion has unleashed forces we simply cannot pretend to have under control. Mosul, after all, isn’t Fallujah or Baghdad with a reputation for fearsome violence. This is a city once held up as a model of Iraqi success: “a model for what Iraq would be like if they could emulate in Baghdad the progress we have made here”, in the words of one commanding officer in 2007 after the famous troop “surge” that was meant to have pacified the city.But even so, it’s impossible to understand this turnaround in Mosul without looking just over the border, in Syria, where a ruler every bit as brutal as Saddam Hussein, is presently in the process of enacting mass violence against his own people. This is a ruler who has merrily danced across what Barack Obama declared to be his “red line” by using chemical weapons against them, proving that this red line didn’t signify much. Obama ran an anaemic campaign for military intervention in Syria that went nowhere. These days he regards Syria merely as “somebody else’s civil war”.We will never know what would have happened had America intervened at that stage. But we do know that Bashar al-Assad had free reign to unleash brutal force, thereby radicalising the environment and laying down a magnet for Sunni terrorist groups. And we now know that those groups are enmeshed with those in Iraq. ISIS doesn’t see the border between the countries. It sees instead an area to be unified under its own rule. Mosul is in terrorist hands because we blew the lid off Iraq, then refused to help put it back on Syria. They are quickly becoming indistinct: the same crisis.The contrast is remarkable: there’s the war with no meaningful pretext, and the pretext that had no war. Sure, this is explained partly by the fact that we’re dealing with two contrasting American presidents. But it’s also true that the disaster of Iraq exposed the limits of America’s power, and completely eroded its moral authority, leaving it with no standing, and no will to do anything about a genuine problem in Syria. We haven’t yet come to terms with just how much damage the invasion of Iraq has done. It’s likely we won’t fully know for decades. But it’s clear that the blowback is already under way, and there’s every chance we’ll wake one day to find that Iraq evolves into the security problem it so emphatically wasn’t in 2003 when we grotesquely pretended otherwise. "], ["Hockey's change of mind not proof of hypocrisy", "May 30, 2014", "292", " There’s just so much to love about the Nine News report on the student protests against higher education fees from 1987 that suddenly re-emerged this week. Peter Harvey, for example, with his celebrated, impossibly low, authoritative tones coming (as they almost always did) from Canberra. His awful brown suit, matched only by the dated fashion of the student protesters he was covering. But the star turn comes undoubtedly from a young Joe Hockey, pledging to “go out onto the streets and to protest … in our campaign for free education”.Touche. As archival footage goes, it’s a good get. But here’s the question: beyond the obvious entertainment value, why should we care about this?The implicit charge – frequently made explicit by an array of internet warriors – is one of hypocrisy. There’s socialist Joe the student unionist who thought deregulating tertiary fees was “suicidal for student welfare”, and there’s cigar-smoking Joe the Liberal heavyweight who now presides over such homicidal policy because it doesn’t affect him.  We’re being asked to conclude that one of them is disingenuous or has sold out to the other. What we’re not being asked to conclude is that someone’s position might change over the course of 27 years. Or that the world might have changed sufficiently in that time to make someone feel a change in position is justified. In short, we’re being asked to hold Hockey to an inhuman standard that demands he adopt one position on all things throughout his life irrespective of circumstance.On that score Labor’s Shadow Assistant Treasurer Andrew Leigh might empathise. He has spent a good chunk of this week sitting in Parliament watching the Abbott government throw his own prose back in his face.  Leigh, it appears, was once a fan of deregulating university fees in precisely the way Joe Hockey wasn’t. This he committed to print in book form in 2004, a year after he had written an op-ed spruiking co-payments for GP visits much as the Coalition has now proposed. The government seems to think this is some sort of miraculous, decisive gift.But, again: why should we care? Like Joe Hockey, Andrew Leigh was a student at the time. Is it possible that a decade of exposure to new ideas, experiences and information might have led him to change his view? It’s a substance-free, opportunistic way of arguing that the Abbott government has chosen here, and now that the Hockey-as-free-education-warrior vision has emerged, we can expect the Labor opposition to return the favour. If they do, it will be equally opportunistic and substance-free.Neither Leigh’s nor Hockey’s volte-faces are scandalous. In fact they both sit comfortably with the broader worldviews they have most recently expressed. Leigh writes incisively about inequality and the stubbornness of privilege in exactly the manner you might expect of someone who has since abandoned ideas like university fee deregulation. Hockey famously spoke about ending the “age of entitlement” even as his party was defending middle-class welfare. You might not like their respective positions, but there is little to indicate they are insincerely held.The idea that they should be embarrassed to have once thought differently, or that this exposes them as partisan hypocrites, merely exposes our political culture as one of confected warfare, where changes of heart are automatic evidence of dishonesty rather than of reflection. We should instead be demanding that our representatives change their views over time. We should expect them to be open to persuasion. And it follows they should have the freedom to be persuaded without attracting some kind of summary judgment for it. That doesn’t mean there isn’t crass hypocrisy and opportunism in politics. Of course there is. It’s possible we saw an example of it this week when Martin Hamilton-Smith, a Liberal stalwart and former party leader, stunningly joined the South Australian Labor government with no prior warning and scant explanation. It’s possible we saw it in the previous federal Labor government on asylum seekers when it first insisted boat arrivals had nothing to do with domestic policy, then shifted dramatically to a policy not merely of offshore processing, but offshore resettlement.  And it’s also possible we’ve seen it for years in Tony Abbott’s position on climate change policy, where, as Malcolm Turnbull has so famously put it, he “in the space of a few months held every possible position on the issue, each one contradicting the position he expressed earlier”.Yes, we should be awake to backflips of convenience. Certainly, we should be holding politicians to account for them, particularly where the political calculations are so short-term and transparent. But not all changes of mind are equal. Not all are poll-inspired and politically cynical. What we need is the capacity to distinguish between the two. A public culture that rushes to judgments of hypocrisy, that fails this test of discernment, is an impoverished one destined for an endless cycle of adolescent sparring that masquerades as a policy debate. It’s a kind of gotcha politics that is more entertaining than edifying. Politicians should be allowed to be people whose positions swing and evolve. If we have inhuman demands of them, we might just find that inhuman brutes, impervious to thought and reflection, are the only ones capable of meeting our requirements. "], ["No way Abbott can now budget for a second term", "May 22, 2014", "659", " Tony Abbott was clearly deflecting this week when he declared his job “is not to win a popularity contest”. It’s the kind of thing no democratic politician really believes, but which you must say in the face of catastrophic polling of the order presently dogging his government. For now the popular focus is on whether or not Abbott can recover; whether this will be the fortnight that ultimately relegates him to a single term. But in truth there are bigger questions here, and the Coalition faces a conundrum far tougher than merely figuring out how to win the next election. And it’s a conundrum created well before last Tuesday.The reason the government broke so many promises in this budget is simple: the promises they made from Opposition were wildly contradictory. You cannot rein in deficits and abolish two major taxes, and replace one of them with a climate change policy that costs billions and promise no tax hikes and quarantine education, health, defence, public broadcasting and pensions from cuts. That’s like a weight-loss diet that does away with protein but promises no cuts to cake and lard! A platform like that was always going to have its day of reckoning. The tragedy is that Abbott didn’t need to do it. He is the Prime Minister today because Labor had descended into an unelectable mess. Even Labor’s popular initiatives such as their Gonski education reforms and the National Disability Insurance Scheme never truly threatened his dominance. Abbott had the freedom not to promise a set of contradictions. He had the freedom to keep his options open and perhaps even to tell us some budgetary truth. But he didn’t. He told us budgetary fantasy as though he hadn’t given a moment’s thought to what would happen after the election.The result is that he brought the Coalition to government with a mandate for almost nothing. Repealing the carbon and mining taxes, sure. Stopping the boats by whatever militant means he could conceive, yes. Paid parental leave, arguably. But what else? Nothing on education, nothing on middle class welfare and especially nothing on industrial relations. In short, nothing that might help repair a budget in “crisis”, real or imagined.But with this budget, the government was behaving as though it had the most monstrous of mandates. It was positively radical in its ambition to break the social democratic model of our welfare state. Encouraging poor people not to go to the doctor by making them pay more for it or leaving young unemployed people without any support for up to six months at a time are things you can only credibly do once you’ve sold a vision to the public. Otherwise they look like randomised cruelty. The reason the government’s reckoning has been so brutal is not merely that the public clearly thinks the budget zeroes in mercilessly on the most vulnerable. It is that it seemed to come from nowhere, without the government even bothering to convince us of the virtues of this approach first.The political calculation here is obvious. This was the tough, axe-wielding budget you get out of the way early in your first term, banking you will have plenty of time to win people back. But it’s not that simple anymore; not when the rejection is this emphatic. So fierce is the reaction that this budget can now only be an ambit claim. Any move Abbott makes from here must be some form of retreat.So it’s not that the Coalition cannot be re-elected in 2016. It’s that now it can only be re-elected via a parade of sweeteners. Precisely what these could be is unclear. For John Howard it took the form of family benefits and tax cuts. Abbott has already trashed the former, and might find the latter difficult in the short term if he really cares at all about the budget. Whatever Abbott finds, it will go against the course he has charted so far. He can either persevere with his austerity reforms, or he can have hope for a second term. But it’s hard to see how he can do both.Which means that Abbott might already have brought his government’s reform phase to an end. What industrial relations policy, for instance, could he possibly risk taking to the next election? How well placed is he to hold a mature debate on raising GST revenue? Indeed what Coalition-friendly reform ideas could he possibly find that will not merely reinforce the mould that has now firmly been cast in the public mind that his politics clearly favours the rich? Abbott simply has no political capital to spend on these things. And if he was unprepared to take anything approaching a contentious reform into an election he was certain to win, it is difficult to see him doing it when he is under electoral threat. That’s a shame because there is no doubt we face serious budgetary and economic questions in the medium term. It’s a shame, too, because it gifts Labor a populist narrative in Opposition that won’t go anywhere near answering those questions. Labor need only rail against Medicare co-payments and petrol prices, now. And it knows it will be railing against a Coalition that has snookered itself. Abbott’s conduct in Opposition meant he came into government with little mandate. His conduct in government ensures next time around, he won’t be able to seek one. "], ["Tony Abbott swaps gender politics for rich friends tax", "May 1, 2014", "220", " Tony Abbott is about to vanish in a puff of existential meaninglessness. Sorry if that sounds heavy, but it seems an inevitable consequence on budget night if he goes ahead with this debt levy proposal. “No new taxes” he boomed in the throes of his anti-Carbon Tax blitz before adding ecstatically: “this is my whole reason for being in politics”.Surprise! Not just for voters, or journalists, but for senior members of Abbott’s very own no-surprises government. “There was no communication from the leader’s office,” revealed one anonymous Liberal. “It’s the biggest f... up we’ve had in a long time.” All of which begs one gigantic question: why? Why would Abbott go anywhere near something so politically dicey, without even consulting his colleagues properly?Perhaps it might be worth violating a Prime Minister’s self-declared raison d’etre and breaking an utterly foundational election promise if it were they only way to stave off Armageddon. But even as emergency fundraising this doesn’t make sense. On any reading, the levy would cover only a tiny fraction of the country's debt. And that's before you factor in how it might encourage people with money to spend less, thereby taking profits away from businesses, and taxes away from the same government apparently so desperate to get more revenue.The only feasible explanation can be that Abbott was searching frantically for a policy that hit middle-to-high-income earners. It's one thing to prepare us for budget pain and tell us it's necessary, but it's quite another to convince people that it's fair. To do that, you need to show - and not merely assert - that everyone will bear some of the brunt. And before this week Abbott had very little to offer anyone looking for examples of rich people making sacrifices. Nothing on, say superannuation or private health insurance. And especially nothing on Paid Parental Leave.Which, as it happens, has much in common with this debt levy idea. It, too, was one of Abbott's \"captain's calls\". It, too, has incensed Abbott's own teammates. It, too, was designed to give Abbott a story to tell. This week shows us how in both cases, the story got away from him.In the case of Paid Parental Leave, it was about women and Abbott's perceived problem with them. This, you might recall, was a time when Abbott was pitted against Julia Gillard, and voters – especially female ones – still liked her. Abbott wanted a statement, and he went big. So big it drew hearty congratulations from then Greens leader Bob Brown.But Abbott's punch never quite landed. Partly this is because he didn't fully commit to the policy's feminist potential. Perhaps sensing business backlash, he quickly presented it as a productivity measure. Aside from being dubious, that is a macroeconomic claim that has little to do with gender equality. The genuinely feminist argument would have emphasised the cultural change inherent in tying parenting payments to employment: namely that it makes parenting part of workplace culture, and not something to be shoved off to Centrelink where it can be stigmatised as welfare. That, you'd imagine, is the kind of argument Bob Brown might have made. But it has a ring of cultural engineering to it that Abbott was never going to embrace. Even when Abbott talks about parental leave as a workplace entitlement, he doesn't explain why this is potentially so transformational. He often calls his policy “visionary”, but it’s not clear that the gender-equity vision is truly his.And that suggests that perhaps the biggest reason it hasn’t worked for Abbott is simply that it is his policy. Can anyone seriously deny that had Gillard introduced this same scheme - even using the same economically-driven arguments as Abbott - that it would have been viewed through the prism of women’s rights? Or that the Coalition would immediately have derided it as radical, leftist, anti-business nonsense more befitting the Greens (who, of course, would have supported it)?So, instead it has become a policy about class. Suddenly it’s part of a right wing agenda to entrench inequality, rather than a progressive one to drive us towards gender equality. It's not women who benefit, now - it's rich people. Statistically, that's overwhelmingly not the case because women are still significantly underpaid in our society and very few of them earn the kind of money that would max out these payments. But this debate isn't being driven by statistics. There are no statistics thatdemonstrate the asserted productivity benefits of the scheme, either. Rather, this debate is being driven by precisely the thing that motivated Abbott to launch the policy from the start: the politics of impressions. And Tony Abbott, friend of the rich clearly remains a more powerful, compelling impression than Tony Abbott, gender warrior. Evidently, Abbott dearly wants to change this. That’s why he finally agreed this week to scale back his scheme. "], ["Barry O'Farrell's Liberal machine as rotten as Labor's", "April 17, 2014", "297", " Perhaps the most telling aspect of the now infamous thank-you note that ended Barry O’Farrell’s premiership this week is that it was sent so soon after his bone-crushing election victory. This was a man who swept to power thanks largely to the insufferable stench of corruption that had engulfed NSW Labor. Thus was Labor’s position apparently unrecoverable, and O’Farrell apparently invincible. All he had to do was stay clean.And yet, there he was, personally accepting an expensive gift from compromised people, marking his gratitude in ink. I’m prepared to believe he genuinely has no recollection of this. But that only underscores the fact that he saw nothing remarkable about the exchange at all; that even as he must have been hawk-eyed about anything that even remotely connected to the corruption that destroyed Labor, he saw this kind of give and take as standard practice.And on this score, he’s probably right. It’s highly unlikely O’Farrell has a uniquely malfunctioning radar, or that he is more corruptible than his colleagues. Au contraire, the truly remarkable fact is that the Liberals to have been so entangled in this Obeidian octopus have been those widely acknowledged as the best, the straightest, the most upright of them: O’Farrell and Arthur Sinodinos.That tells us plenty. Not so much about the character of these men, but about the nature of the world they routinely inhabit. Until now, the story of NSW corruption has been presented as a thoroughly Labor one, backed at the federal level by the spectre of union corruption so vast it now demands its own royal commission. At every opportunity, the Liberal Party has sought to make this connection. Hence its bizarre pursuit of the complete non-scandal surrounding the Australian Workers Union and Julia Gillard’s time as a labour lawyer, or its constant references to the faceless men of Sussex Street upon Kevin Rudd’s knifing. The point was clear: that the rot was Labor’s rot.But the real world doesn’t respect such nearly confected boundaries. So we shouldn’t be surprised that this scandal has so easily escaped its partisan confines. No Liberal has been found corrupt, but this episode reminds us that the Labor and Liberal parties do not represent two different worlds. There are shades of difference but they are both ultimately similar machines directed at similar goals and subject to the same power plays and moral compromises. At bottom, they represent the same subculture that is the profession of modern politics.That is why, away from the public show of political conflict, politicians tend to get along surprisingly well with each other, in much the same way as members of most other professions do. The professionalisation of politics does not merely mean our political class is drawn from a narrow set of backgrounds. It also means they have markedly similar experiences and move in very similar circles once they’re there. If they aren’t in parliament, they sit on similar boards and offer similar consultancy services to the same group of people. Eddie Obeid might have been Labor’s heart of darkness, but he was only ever a step or two away from the nearest senior Liberal.There’s a self-reinforcing system at play here, of favours and networking and dealing utterly divorced from the democratic process. Worse, it seems beyond reform even when everyone acknowledges both problem and solution. Take the Labor Party, booted so unceremoniously from federal office last year in part because it looked so focused in its own internal manoeuvring.Most recently it copped a flogging in the Western Australian Senate election. Each time this happens, sage elders talk sombrely about wake-up calls and a message from the electorate received. Each time they pledge to create a more grassroots party, less beholden to the kind of political backscratching now on display. And each time nothing happens. That’s the nature of such entrenched systems. Reform becomes too hard. You can have all the wake-up calls in the world, but you can also determinedly sleep through them.In some ways Tony Abbott is right to describe O’Farrell as ‘‘honourable’’ for falling so readily on his sword. It is true he has acted swiftly, decisively and apparently with the kind of accountability so few ministers are prepared to exhibit when scandal strikes. In a saner world this might be a sacrificial act that rehabilitates the nobility of politicians.But it is far from clear this will be the legacy of O’Farrell’s demise. Rather, this could become the moment that gave tangible expression to what so much of the electorate has already intuited: that there is something hopelessly compromised about the very culture of mainstream Australian politics.They’re all bad guys now. They’re all in it for themselves to the point they don’t even know - or simply can’t remember - when they’re breaching our trust. Clearly that’s not true at an individual level, but it doesn’t have to be if it becomes received wisdom. In short, we’re witnessing the slow motion desecration of the whole idea of politics.That’s what is behind this week’s Nielsen poll that showed voters abandoning both major parties, and seeking refuge in a resurgent Greens and a fledgling Palmer United Party. That’s why the same thing happened in the West Australian senate. Our political landscape now inspires such low esteem that the only place we can park our approval is on the margins: as far away from power as possible. The problem, though, is that no one ever governed from there. "], ["Revenge: the CIA's new doctrine of torture", "April 3, 2014", "58", " Why do we torture? Ever since the CIA embarked upon its program of “enhanced interrogation techniques” we’ve had to reckon with that question. That means we’ve had to reckon with the assertion that it is, at least occasionally, justified. And in that connection, perhaps the high watermark was the 2011 killing of Osama bin Laden, which the CIA has always insisted was made possible only through its torture-by-another-name.That claim took something of a whack this week, when it emerged that a US Senate report has found torture delivered no key evidence that led ultimately to bin Laden’s death – and that the torture was worse than the public was ever allowed to know. Apparently whatever information turned out to be critical was extracted from standard interrogations, and whatever information came especially via torture wasn’t terribly important.In the American context, it’s a significant finding; one that goes to the heart of the Bush administration’s legacy rehabilitation project. Presently, Bush’s resort to torture stands as a kind of moral and political scar. If it can instead be presented as the key to killing bin Laden, then presumably all is not merely forgiven, but admired.So I understand the fight. And I understand the determination of (mainly Democrat, but also some Republican) senators to set the record straight. At stake is the legitimacy of torture, which would undermine the most foundational philosophical assumptions of open, liberal democratic government. But I can’t escape the feeling that some steps have been missed here; that the mere fact we’re even witnessing this argument reveals a remarkable, alarming shift in the public discussion of torture.At least until very recently, even the most brazen, hawkish justifications of torture have presented it as an emergency measure of last resort. The classic scenario is that of a ticking time bomb: you know a bomb is about to detonate at any moment; you know the person you’ve captured has information that will help you locate and defuse it; you know that the only way to get it out of them in time is to bring out the thumbscrews or attach electrodes to your detainee’s genitals. It’s a very carefully constructed setting that proceeds on the understanding that if there’s no life-threatening emergency there’s simply no justification because, with time up your sleeve, conventional interrogation techniques should yield all the information torture will, and probably more reliably.But even this highly concocted set-up has its problems. If the emergency is so pressing, and your detainee is so committed to his terrorism, he need only hold out for a short period of time. Or he need only give you enough incorrect information to stop the torture and send you chasing false leads until it’s too late. Then there’s the fact that in the real world, you don’t really have any way of knowing for sure that your detainee has the specific information you need to stop the explosion. Even if you knew for certain the detainee’s involved, once captured, you cannot be sure his information is up to date; that the plans haven’t been changed. It’s for these sorts of reasons (among others) that international law has long held that torture is never justified, even during national security emergencies.But it’s one thing to argue about ticking bombs. It’s something else altogether to argue the case for torture in the total absence of any specific emergency. And yet, that is what the bin Laden case ultimately boils down to. Sure, bin Laden was a dangerous man. But no one can be, or even is arguing that his killing prevented an imminent attack. Indeed it’s far from clear that his killing has reduced the terrorist threat at all. One of the great ironies of the American political debate is that the same politicians spruiking the benefits of torture seem to be the same ones warning us that – even in this post-bin Laden era – al-Qaeda is as dangerous as ever. “Al-Qaeda is in many ways stronger than it was before 9/11” declared New York Republican Peter King last year. It “poses a bigger threat to attack inside the US right now than it did before 9/11” added retiring Michigan Republican (and aspiring talk-radio host) Mike Rogers.The sheer lack of emergency here is evident even from the information said to have been unearthed. The most infamous concerns intelligence provided by Khalid Sheikh Mohammed. This is a megalomaniacal character who confessed ridiculously to more than 30 terrorist plots including attacks on targets that didn’t exist at the time he was taken to Guantanamo Bay. This is also a man who was waterboarded a whopping 183 times – which is not something you can do in an emergency, and which is curious for the fact that his torturers clearly thought there was something to be gained on the 183rd occasion that couldn’t be on the 182nd. If torture is so good for extracting crucial information fast, why didn’t they get what they needed, say, by waterboarding 150?Certainly, it’s useful to know that torture didn’t propel the successful hunt for bin Laden. But the implicit question this raises is an important one: what if it did? Would that make torture a legitimate counter-terrorism norm, not in the case of emergency, but just as a matter of routine intelligence gathering? Do we not even need to ask any longer whether or not the same information – or even better information – might have been gathered through traditional methods? This, after all, is what the FBI has been insisting emphatically all along, much to the CIA’s annoyance.Or is it simply enough for us to say that because these are evil people they somehow deserve to be tortured? If so, then let’s at least let’s say so explicitly. And let’s acknowledge that we’re articulating a new doctrine of torture far more suited to the world’s most brutal autocrats: that we’ll torture for revenge. "], ["Brandis' race hate laws are whiter than white", "March 27, 2014", "149", " Perhaps the most remarkable thing about George Brandis' now infamous comment this week that Australians \"have the right to be bigots\" is that it was so unremarkable. Sure, it's a grating sound bite, but as a matter of substance it's entirely obvious. Of course we have a right to be bigots. We always have.That's the point that has been buried here. Nothing in the Racial Discrimination Act as it presently stands precludes bigotry. In fact, I'll go a step further: you're even allowed to express your bigotry. Happens all the time. Read a newspaper. Bigoted views are published there several times in an average week.Two things flow from this. First, that critics of the Racial Discrimination Act are simply wrong to suggest that our free speech is so curtailed that we can't risk saying anything offensive. The courts have long made clear that the Act only contemplates serious cases. The caricature that we're placed at the mercy of the most delicate people's sensibilities is nothing less than a gross misrepresentation of the law.Second, that supporters of the Racial Discrimination Act are wrong if they insist it provides anything like substantial protection against racism. I've copped my share of racial abuse both in public and in private, and section 18C wasn't ever going to do a damn thing about it.So in the current furore, it's worth remembering that we're not exactly playing for cutthroat stakes. To be clear, the Abbott government's proposed legislation really would allow for almost any racist speech you can imagine. Any \"public discussion of any political, social, cultural (or) religious\" matter will be exempt, no matter how boneheaded, dishonest or odious.Precisely how it is possible to racially vilify someone without discussing a \"social\" matter is beyond me. But for all that, Australia will not simply explode in a blaze of white supremacy upon the repeal of these provisions (which is far from inevitable in any case).Rather, there is something else at stake here that is much bigger than any particular legislative provision. I'm not so much concerned by section 18C or its repeal, but by the mythology on which that repeal is apparently based. Unspoken at the heart of this debate is a contest over the way race relations works in this country – and on whose terms.That's what struck me most about the proposed legislation. It's just so . . . well, white. In fact it's probably the whitest piece of proposed legislation I've encountered during my lifetime. It trades on all the assumptions about race that you're likely to hold if, in your experience, racism is just something that other people complain about.Subsection (3) – mostly ignored to this point – is perhaps the most subtly revealing. Earlier subsections make it unlawful to do something that is \"reasonably likely\" to vilify or intimidate someone on the basis of race. But reasonably likely according to whom? Who gets to decide whether something is intimidating or vilifying? Subsection (3) provides the answer.Whether something is \"reasonably likely\" to vilify is \"to be determined by the standards of an ordinary reasonable member of the Australian community\", it begins. Fair enough. But then it adds in the most pointed way: \"not by the standards of any particular group within the Australian community\". That's code. It means, not by the standard of whatever racial minority is being vilified. Not the ordinary reasonable wog, gook or sand nigger; the ordinary reasonable Australian. And what race is this hypothetical \"ordinary reasonable member of the Australian community\" meant to be, exactly? If you answered that they have no particular race, then you've just given the whitest answer possible. It's the answer that assumes there is such a thing as racial neutrality. Of course, only white people have the chance to be neutral because in our society only white is deemed normal; only whiteness is invisible.Every other race is marked by its difference, by its conspicuousness – by its non-whiteness. White people are not non-Asians or non-blacks. They aren't \"ethnic\" as the term is popularly used. If the \"ordinary reasonable Australian\" has no race, then whether or not we admit it, that person is white by default and brings white standards and experiences to assessing the effects of racist behaviour. Anything else would be too particular.This matters because – if I may speak freely – plenty of white people (even ordinary reasonable ones) are good at telling coloured people what they should and shouldn't find racist, without even the slightest awareness that they might not be in prime position to make that call.This is particularly problematic with the proposed offence of racial \"intimidation\". To \"intimidate\" is \"to cause fear of physical harm\" according to the draft Act. Now our ordinary reasonable white person is being asked to tell, say, black people whether or not they are \"reasonably likely\" to be fearful of physical harm. Black people – reasonable ones – might actually be fearful, but ultimately a hypothetical white person will decide that for them.I have no doubt the Abbott government doesn't intend this. It doesn't need to. That's the problem. This is just the level of privilege we're dealing with. This is what happens when protection from racism becomes a gift from the majority rather than a central part of the social pact. It's what happens when racial minorities are required to be supplicants, whose claims to social equality are subordinate to those of powerful media outlets outraged they might occasionally have to publish an apology.And it's what happens when lawmakers and the culturally empowered proceed as though ours is a society without a racial power hierarchy simply because they sit at the top of it. "], ["George Brandis' Racial Discrimination Act changes create the whitest piece of proposed legislation I've encountered", "March 27, 2014", "323", " Perhaps the most remarkable thing about George Brandis’ now infamous comment this week that Australians “have the right to be bigots” is that it was so unremarkable. Sure, it’s a grating soundbite, but as a matter of substance it’s entirely obvious. Of course we have a right to be bigots. We always have.That’s the point that has been buried here. Nothing in the Racial Discrimination Act as it presently stands precludes bigotry. In fact I’ll go a step further: you’re even allowed to express your bigotry. Happens all the time. Read a newspaper. Bigoted views are published there several times in an average week.Two things flow from this. First, that critics of the Racial Discrimination Act are simply wrong to suggest that our free speech is so curtailed that we can’t risk saying anything offensive. The courts have long made clear that the Act only contemplates serious cases. The caricature that we’re placed at the mercy of the most delicate people’s sensibilities is nothing less than a gross misrepresentation of the law.Second, that supporters of the Racial Discrimination Act are wrong if they insist it provides anything like substantial protection against racism. I’ve copped my share of racial abuse both in public and in private, and section 18C wasn’t ever going to do a damn thing about it.So in the current furore, it’s worth remembering that we’re not exactly playing for cut-throat stakes. To be clear, the Abbott government’s proposed legislation really would allow for almost any racist speech you can imagine. Any “public discussion of any political, social, cultural (or) religious” matter will be exempt, no matter how boneheaded, dishonest or odious.Precisely how it is possible to racially vilify someone without discussing a “social” matter is beyond me. But for all that, Australia will not simply explode in a blaze of white supremacy upon the repeal of these provisions (which is far from inevitable in any case).Rather, there is something else at stake here that is much bigger than any particular legislative provision. I’m not so much concerned by section 18C or its repeal, but by the mythology on which that repeal is apparently based. Unspoken at the heart of this debate is a contest over the way race relations works in this country – and on whose terms.That’s what struck me most about the proposed legislation. It’s just so … well, white. In fact it’s probably the whitest piece of proposed legislation I’ve encountered during my lifetime. It trades on all the assumptions about race that you’re likely to hold if, in your experience, racism is just something that other people complain about.Subsection (3) – mostly ignored to this point – is perhaps the most subtly revealing. Earlier subsections make it unlawful to do something that is “reasonably likely” to vilify or intimidate someone on the basis of race. But reasonably likely according to whom? Who gets to decide whether something is intimidating or vilifying? Subsection (3) provides the answer.Whether something is “reasonably likely” to vilify is “to be determined by the standards of an ordinary reasonable member of the Australian community” it begins. Fair enough. But then it adds in the most pointed way: “not by the standards of any particular group within the Australian community.” That’s code. It means, not by the standard of whatever racial minority is being vilified. Not the ordinary reasonable wog, gook or sand-nigger; the ordinary reasonable Australian. And what race is this hypothetical “ordinary reasonable member of the Australian community” meant to be, exactly?If you answered that they have no particular race, then you’ve just given the whitest answer possible. It’s the answer that assumes there is such a thing as racial neutrality. Of course, only white people have the chance to be neutral because in our society only white is deemed normal; only whiteness is invisible.Every other race is marked by its difference, by its conspicuousness – by its non-whiteness. White people are not non-Asians or non-blacks. They aren’t “ethnic” as the term is popularly used. If the “ordinary reasonable Australian” has no race, then whether or not we admit it, that person is white by default and brings white standards and experiences to assessing the effects of racist behaviour. Anything else would be too particular.This matters because – if I may speak freely – plenty of white people (even ordinary reasonable ones) are good at telling coloured people what they should and shouldn’t find racist, without even the slightest awareness that they might not be in prime position to make that call.This is particularly problematic with the proposed offence of racial “intimidation”. To “intimidate” is “to cause fear of physical harm” according to the draft Act. Now our ordinary reasonable white person is being asked to tell, say, black people whether or not they are “reasonably likely” to be fearful of physical harm. Black people – reasonable ones – might actually be fearful, but ultimately a hypothetical white person will decide that for them.I have no doubt the Abbott government doesn’t intend this. It doesn’t need to. That’s the problem. This is just the level of privilege we're dealing with. This is what happens when protection from racism becomes a gift from the majority rather than a central part of the social pact. It’s what happens when racial minorities are required to be supplicants, whose claims to social equality are subordinate to those of powerful media outlets outraged they might occasionally have to publish an apology.And it’s what happens when lawmakers and the culturally empowered proceed as though ours is a society without a racial power hierarchy simply because they sit at the top of it. "], ["Game is as great as ever, and empires as avaricious", "March 21, 2014", "120", " It seems the good people of Sevastopol really want to be Russian. All 123 per cent of them turned out to vote in this week's referendum to say so.They're a fickle bunch, though. If they're anything like their fellow Crimeans, only about a third of them felt this way in 2011, and only a quarter still did last year. This week it's in the vicinity of 97 per cent. That's some turnaround, even if you allow for the fact that there was a mass boycott from anti-Russian residents, or that people armed with only a Russian passport were allowed to vote.So Crimea is now part of Russia - at least if you ask Vladimir Putin, who cheerfully annexed the peninsula in response. The West, of course, is apoplectic, branding all this illegal and imposing sanctions on Russia. And indeed, on one reading this is uniquely egregious.Not since World War II has anyone in Europe simply taken territory from a sovereign country. Russia has its pretexts - chief among them that the ethnic Russian population in Ukraine is facing persecution - but none led legitimately to swallowing another nation's land. Especially not after a dodgy referendum that gave a choice only between joining Russia and effective autonomy. If you wanted to remain part of Ukraine, you simply had no box to tick.The hypocrisy here is profound. When Kosovo held a referendum in 2008 to declare its independence from Serbia, the apoplexy was all Russia's. It didn't matter that this followed nine years of negotiations, during which time Kosovo was under international supervision. It didn't matter that the Kosovar people had endured dozens of massacres at Serbian hands as part of a dedicated ethnic cleansing campaign - a level of persecution that renders any comparison with the experience of Russian speakers in Ukraine simply ridiculous. Russia screamed this violated Serbia's territorial integrity, and that the United Nations was therefore obliged to declare the referendum void and impose \"severe administrative measures\" against Kosovar institutions.It's the same story Russia always tells, no matter how wretched the circumstances (see Syria). In the Russian view, a nation should be free to persecute as many of its own people as it pleases without having to deal with foreign interference. Sovereignty trumps all.Listen closely to Putin's words back in 2008: \"The precedent of Kosovo is a terrible precedent, which will de facto blow apart the whole system of international relations, developed not over decades, but over centuries.\" Heavy stuff.Now it seems it's a precedent he's only too happy to follow, with interest. Putin's rhetoric must thus return to condemn him: he is not merely undermining Ukraine, or Western interests; he's undermining the entire international system. Any way you cut it, Putin is adopting a decidedly imperial pose.All of which would be scandalous if it weren't so common. The most tin-eared, self-unaware comment of this episode must still surely be US Secretary of State John Kerry's insistence that \"you just don't in the 21st century behave in 19th century fashion by invading another country on a completely trumped-up pretext\". Of course, this is perhaps the most eloquent description of America's 21st century invasion of Iraq that anyone has yet offered.Certainly, Iraq and Crimea are not identical. The biggest difference (aside from the hundreds of thousands of Iraqi civilian deaths) is that America was never going to annex Iraq. That is no longer America's style. But it would be naive to stop there - to accept at face value the suggestion that America therefore has no imperial impulses and operates as a modest nation-state, concerned merely with the administration of its own territory. The age of empire may formally have passed but that just means today's empires take a different form.Now they expand interests and project power through non-military means. They prop up compliant, unpopular, frequently dictatorial allies through copious aid. Elsewhere they fund civil society groups that non-allied governments regard as hostile. They build military and economic alliances with countries they feel a strategic need to have on their side.Ukraine is precisely such a country. Indeed, so are several of the former Soviet states that sit between Russia and Europe. This is why America has been so keen to bring them into NATO, thereby forging a military pact with them - the kind that was mobilised to pound Serbia in 1999. Russia fears the same thing could happen to it if NATO incorporates too many countries that sit on its borders. Russia openly regards this as an existential threat.So far NATO has coaxed Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania. In time it hoped to add Georgia and Ukraine, thereby surrounding Russia. There's nothing random about America's designs here. And there's nothing random about Russia's determination to stop it, and expand its own alliances in Eurasia. This is an imperial game.\"I prefer Russia,\" says Sean Connery's character in The Russia House. \"It's as corrupt as America, but there's less bullshit.\" That's about the size of it. When circumstances demand it, neither power cares much for the niceties of international law, and neither is meaningfully bound by it. Both aim to project their power as far as possible. But America's form of empire building is generally sophisticated enough to retain the veneer of normal international relations. Russia just goes ahead and annexes stuff. "], ["Tony Abbott's plan is to have no plan at all", "March 7, 2014", "257", " We're beginning to run a touch low on icons. With Holden's demise now official, the focus this week has shifted to Qantas, which is so stuffed that its strategy is to approach the government for an unsecured loan of $3 billion.That, of course, was fanciful. Just how fanciful becomes clear when you consider that the Abbott government has now ruled out even providing a debt guarantee, which at least in the short term involves handing no money over at all. In fact, the government's only plan for Qantas seems to be the proposed legislation it has no hope of passing, which would allow it to seek greater foreign investment.''No plan B,'' screams the opposition. True enough, I suppose. But let us not be lured into thinking this points to a government with no ideas and no imagination. The absence of a plan here is something studied and deliberate. The Abbott government has a plan to have no plan and it's really committed to it.That's the whole point of neo-liberalism. It sees the world as a market and solves every problem through it. In this scheme, governments exist to keep the market running, not to develop elaborate plans for companies or industries. Thus, the Abbott government's response to the Qantas disaster is an entirely predictable one for a neo-liberal government to offer: remove as many market distortions as possible, then do nothing else.To be sure, the government hasn't been pristine on this. Just last week it gave money and access to favourable loans to drought-stricken farmers. Last year it blocked foreign investment in Graincorp. And, of course, there was the now infamous grant it pledged to Cadbury before the election. Indeed, there are still plenty of small business grants being given.But politics is always compromised to some degree and the political imperatives in such cases are typically clear, focused as they are on winning marginal seats or placating the Nationals. It's on the big cases that the government has been determined to make a statement. So with Qantas, as with Holden, Toyota and SPC Ardmona, the government is doing more than making policy decisions. It is articulating a philosophy. Plenty of people hate it, but that only proves that it's unmistakeable.Ideas, it seems, are back in Australian politics. In just six months in office, the Abbott government has discovered a level of philosophical clarity Labor couldn't manage in six years. This is a remarkable thing for a Coalition whose approach to opposition had almost nothing to do with ideology. Abbott's promiscuous opportunism delivered his party government, but also the fear that his would be a government with no direction. So much for that.The problem is that we don't really know where this road ends. The almost total absence of ideological contest in the past two elections has meant that we've never really debated this. At no point has the Coalition had to explain what its Australia would look like in, say, 30 years. What do we think our economy will look like, for instance? With so many traditional jobs and venerable companies passing into history, you might think it an urgent question. But the Coalition feels no need to answer it because neo-liberalism asks us to trust that the market will simply produce more efficient replacement jobs. No plan, remember? That's the plan.It's a lot of trust to place in a theory. And even if it works, it means a great deal of pain along the way for a great many people. This is what Labor is most keen to exploit. But even so, it has hardly unleashed the kind of withering attack that leaves the nation's ears ringing. A government surrounded by enough bad news to put it in serious trouble still has its head above water.That's because the government has managed to weave much of this bad news into a story. Its decisions are comprehensible, even if you instinctively detest them; coherent, even if galling. This is more or less the opposite of what Labor achieved in government, where, for example, it neglected its story on climate change to such an extent that by the time the carbon tax arrived it was discussed almost entirely in economic terms and viewed through the prism of political dishonesty.The result is that Labor can't so easily adopt the Abbott approach to opposition, which was to throw whichever punches were in reach, create a sense of chaos and declare the government illegitimate. Abbott could do that because Labor's narrative was never particularly clear, so it didn't need a more comprehensive or consistent riposte.By contrast, this government's stand against corporate support is easily grasped and stands as a broad guiding principle. Labor needs a counter-narrative of its own that the Coalition can't just dismiss as propping up failing businesses, but it's far from clear what that is.This reflects what is perhaps the biggest difference between the way the major parties do politics. Labor in power attempts to prove itself on the Coalition's terms, hence the obsessive and ultimately futile quest for a surplus. The Coalition simply pays no heed to Labor. That's what happens when only one side has clear ideological zeal. And so we have ideas in politics again. What we lack is an ideological contest. "], ["The logic of PNG policy is sanctioned horror", "February 21, 2014", "96", " Sorry, but we don't get to be outraged at this. The fact that a person is now dead, that another has been shot or that yet another has a fractured skull doesn't change anything. Immigration Minister Scott Morrison is undoubtedly right when he describes this violent episode on Manus Island as a ''terrible tragedy''. In fact, he's more right than he knows. Tragedy, in the Greek sense, unfolds as an inevitability. The very thing that makes the tragic hero so tragic is that his fate is sealed, his demise is clear, but he continues to take every step that leads him there. And in the case of Manus Island, that is exactly where we are.We don't get to be outraged because this violence, with its brutal, deadly consequences, is inherent. We chose it, even if we've refused at every stage to acknowledge that. It is the very logic of our asylum seeker policy - which is built on the sole rationality of deterrence - to create horror. We're banking on it. That's emphatically the point. So now, let us make this calculus finally explicit: whatever these people are fleeing, whatever circumstance makes them think they'd be better off chancing death on boats hardly worthy of that description, we must offer them something worse. That something is PNG.The worse it is, the more effective it is destined to be, and the more it fulfils the philosophical intentions of the policy. Put simply, this tragedy is not any kind of evidence of policy failure. It is, in fact, the very best form of deterrence. This is what it looks like when the policy works.For now, we're busily piecing together exactly what happened. Hence the calls for an inquiry. We assemble the facts as a necessary ritual, but it's ultimately an irrelevance. If it turns out that these asylum seekers were set upon by the PNG police or by locals, what difference will it make? It will merely have demonstrated what we have long known: that PNG is a highly dangerous country, racked by lawlessness and violence.The capital, Port Moresby, is routinely listed among the least liveable cities on the planet. Last year, The Economist had it third worst, besting only Damascus and Dhaka, and therefore ranking below most of the cities these detainees have fled. And that's the reason the policy of transferring boat people to PNG is meant to work: because we're pointedly not offering these people protection if they're found to be refugees.And if the detainees are found to have triggered the violence? No doubt such a finding would be useful fodder for those determined to present them as villains, undeserving of our sympathy or protection. That, after all, is the narrative that surrounds asylum seekers whenever this sort of thing happens. But that only highlights an essential fact: this sort of thing keeps happening.Labor, unable to criticise the policy because it is theirs, can only present this death as some kind of managerial problem; as evidence that the Abbott government is mismanaging the centre. But riotous violence happened repeatedly on its watch, in Nauru and Villawood, as in Baxter and Woomera previously. Onshore, offshore, it didn't matter. Labor's objections - even in this utterly lame, limp form - are political and disingenuous.When social behaviour repeats itself like this, we have two explanations open to us. One is that this is a coincidence of sorts: that it is nothing more than the misbehaviour of immoral individuals gaming the system, and that these individuals merely happen to pop up repeatedly. This is very much the explanation favoured by officialdom - from both major parties - who immediately declare these rioters to have failed any decent character test, having revealed themselves as criminally inclined.The other explanation is that there is something about the circumstances of detainees that generates this behaviour. Put any group of people through this wringer, and they will eventually respond with riotous protest. Such behaviour, then, is not a function of the defective personalities of individuals, but the inevitable human reaction to inhuman treatment.Naturally, officials cannot abide this. Certainly, they are keen on talking about our ''system'', and preserving its integrity. But they present it as entirely passive; as a set of rules and processes that facilitate orderly management, rather than something active in its own right. As far as politicians are concerned, our systems don't have consequences.This, of course, is bollocks. But it's bipartisan bollocks, so for most relevant purposes it masquerades as truth. That's why we're blind to it. We respond to a detainee killed, but seem far less moved by the several to have committed suicide. Through it all we exonerate ourselves through the fiction that we played no part in their misery, or that those who riot are immorally cynical.But the cynicism is ours. Even the briefest sampling of commercial talkback radio this week revealed a streak within us that sees a detainee's death merely as comeuppance. The political truth is that there is almost nothing any government could do that the electorate would deem too brutal, which is precisely how we got here.A poll last month had 60 per cent of us urging the Abbott government to ''increase the severity'' of our policies towards asylum seekers. That's not a pragmatic policy judgment. We find something cathartic about this official form of violence.The truth is we've never really come to terms with why it is people get on boats, and why it is that, faced with hopeless inaction once they're detained, they protest. In fact, our public conversation isn't even terribly interested in knowing. That is why, when we do finally discover the facts of Manus, they will mean nothing. "], ["James Foley beheading baits America to intervene", "August 22, 2014", "6", " \"Without these videos and photos and firsthand experience, you can't really tell the world how bad it might be.\"  When you consider that these are the words of James Foley, the very same American journalist whose own brutish beheading at the hands of ISIS was this week filmed and posted online, it's about as chillingly foreboding as it gets.  Foley wanted us to know the horrors of Syria.  He devoted the last stage of his life to it.  But it is by his own horrific death that he has most shockingly told us how bad things might be.Now comes the search for meaning; for what this horror signifies.  The incorrigible extremism of ISIS, certainly.  But that much has already been proven at length as it has tried to perpetrate a genocide against local Yazidis, and routinely beheaded Christians.  And yet there is something different about this development that deserves our attention: something that reveals not merely ISIS's barbarism, but its weakness.When you are beheading locals, and stringing up the severed heads for public display, you're clearly doing more than killing people.  ISIS's rampant violence has thus far not merely been a campaign of ethnic cleansing and genocide, but one more broadly of intimidation and control.  Certainly, it has wanted to exterminate non-Muslims.  But it has also been keen to eliminate Shiite Muslims and or even Sunnis it deems insufficiently obedient.  It has been trying desperately to assert authority over the territory it claims to control. The violence was public and local, with the very clear aim of gaining total compliance.This was ISIS in Jacobin mode; its post-revolutionary Régime de la Terreur.  In this respect at least ISIS was attempting to live up to its pretentious new brand: not as a group aspiring to a state, but as a state already achieved. Hence, \"Islamic State\", a rebranding that has always been dubious and was from the very start rejected even by its extreme Islamist cousins.  But at least it could plausibly lay claim to a serious chunk of territory straddling the Iraq-Syria border.  This was a movement on the march, whose advance had proven irresistible.Now there is resistance.  On the ground this has come in the form of the Iraqi military and especially Kurdish militias enjoying perhaps their first ever serious wave of international support.  From the air it has taken the form of US strikes, that have clearly pushed ISIS back from the Kurdish city of Erbil, and helped deliver the strategically crucial Mosul Dam into Kurdish hands.  For the moment, the Americans are pretty chuffed: \"their morale is suffering, their competency and capacity has been damaged\" declared the Pentagon press secretary this week.This could, of course, be the Obama administration's own spin.  But James Foley's execution suggests there is plenty of truth to it. This is not a local act of intimidation intended to establish and consolidate the power of a fledgling, self-declared state.  This is a global broadcast intended to draw a reaction from a global audience.  And it is this fact alone – far more than the literal content of the threats ISIS is making – that speaks volumes, here.  This week ISIS left behind its Jacobin pretensions and returned to its al-Qaedaist nature. It went from Terror (which is what the state does), to terrorism (which is what the militant without a state does).Thus are ISIS's motives abundantly plain.  It is doing what terrorist groups must do: recruiting.  And the best way to do that is to agitate and provoke; to radicalise the environment.  On this score, ISIS is treading an extremely well-worn path.  The aim is to put on a show of commitment and strength; something so confident and shocking that it will impress potential recruits. That's why Foley had to be humiliated before being killed.  It's why his death had to be gruesome.  It's a message calculated to give young radicalised Muslims a sense of power.  Indeed, we've seen this before – about a decade ago, from Abu Musab al-Zarqawi's al-Qaeda in Iraq.  As it happened, al-Zarqawi's campaign ended abruptly because it was hopelessly counterproductive.  It repulsed the very people it was intended to impress, and the al-Qaeda leadership pulled al-Zarqawi into line.  ISIS, as is frequently noted, is a more extreme incarnation of al-Qaeda, but it is hard to believe it would pursue this if it believed the practice would still be self-defeating.  So it must have reason to believe it will work differently this time.That reason is most likely that it is operating in radically different circumstances.  Ten years ago the US invasion was young and the carnage was fresh.  America's presence was a major radicalising force in itself, which had energised jihadists all over the world.  For al-Qaeda to behead civilians on film was merely for it to be gratuitous, and to compromise whatever moral appeal it claimed for itself.  But now, America has left.  Its present military reprise is very narrow and limited, nothing like the scale of shock and awe. Moreover it appears determined to keep it that way.That doesn't work for ISIS.  It needs America.  More to the point, it needs American intervention on a much grander scale.  However much it protests that it wants Obama to cease air strikes, it plainly seeks the opposite: to provoke the American public with something impossible to ignore, something so grotesque that it demands retaliation.  ISIS wants the American public screaming for Obama to escalate. It's about the oldest terrorist tactic there is.  Provoke overreaction, provide a magnet for radicalisation, swell the ranks and watch the cycle of violence unfold.  Indeed, this is precisely the story of the past decade or so.  James Foley's murder is about whether or not that will be the story of the next one. "], ["Tony Abbott's faux IR attack laid bare", "February 7, 2014", "223", " Liberal backbencher and member for Murray Sharman Stone is presently the most effective opposition leader in the country. She's across her brief, argues her case powerfully and directly and carries with her an undeniable sincerity that spectacularly subordinates her own career advancement prospects to the interests of her constituents.But, perhaps most profoundly, she has managed in the space of a week to surround the government with a series of intractable questions that drive at the heart of exactly what this hitherto opaque government is really trying to achieve. Stone is making the government transparent.To be clear, she almost certainly does not intend anything so grand. Her aim is simply to reverse her colleagues' decision to deny SPC Ardmona the $25 million it apparently needs to keep operating.But when you accuse your own boss of \"lying\" and \"hypocrisy\", and when you lay bare the political imperatives of making election promises to marginal seats that contradict the decisions you make in safe ones, you inevitably open a vein. This is no longer just about whether or not the government's decision is justified. It's about why it has chosen to present this issue the way it has.Why did Prime Minister Tony Abbott so grossly misrepresent SPC's enterprise bargaining agreement, and the costs it imposes on the company? The government had coherent (even if contestable) reasons for its decision: SPC sits in a highly profitable company flush with its own cash to invest, unlike our debt-riddled government; giving money in these circumstances sets an appalling precedent of corporate welfare, inviting profitable businesses to queue up for handouts; this government is philosophically driven by the principle that it is for businesses to stand or fall on their own.Fleetingly, the government mentioned these. Since the storm of protest, it has fallen back on them. But for what Abbott has described as a \"defining decision\" of this government - one that underlines its firm philosophical commitment to non-intervention in the market and the end of corporate welfare - the government has now significantly muddied its own waters.There is scant justification for placing industrial relations at the centre of this story. Ask SPC why it's struggling and you get a very clear answer that emphatically has nothing to do with industrial relations. Employees' allowances, they've informed us, cost them $116,467 last year. Next to the $25 million they're after, that's piddling. In that context there was simply no need for Abbott to give the company, which he had just finished telling us was so well run, public advice on how bad its industrial arrangements are. SPC knows its industrial arrangements, considerably better than the government does, it turns out.No, the government's performance here is for the electorate.In this respect, the SPC decision is really chapter two. Chapter one came last week when Employment Minister Eric Abetz warned Australia risked \"something akin to a wages explosion of the pre-Accord era when unsustainable wage growth simply pushed thousands of Australians out of work\". As it happens, actual wage growth is the lowest we've ever seen, but Abetz wasn't talking about money. He was taking aim at conditions: too much leave and the like, making businesses less profitable.Abetz's evidence was thin, which is probably why economists broadly dismissed his claims. He drew on a few examples from the car-making and resources industries, which represent the extremes of our two-speed economy and not an economy-wide trend of over-generosity.But that is the portrait of our economy the government is urging on us: one where it is workers' conditions negotiated collectively with employers that cost jobs, and not the bigger underlying economic conditions such as the strength of our currency or our exposure to a global marketplace that often reciprocates with more protectionist measures than we afford ourselves.The SPC case, therefore, had to be bent into shape to fit this narrative. That's why the government emphasised things such as the EBA's \"wet allowance\", which means almost nothing to anyone, and for that precise reason sounds idiosyncratic and decadently, unjustifiably generous.\"Wet allowance? I don't have a wet allowance. No one has a wet allowance! Must be a rort!\" thought the public. Or at least it did until it became clear this allowance covers the costs of protective gear for people whose job brings them into contact with dangerous chemicals, and that SPC no longer pays it anyway, preferring instead to buy the gear for the workers itself.Significantly, this narrative isn't simply one of union bashing. Listen to Abbott and Abetz and you'll note the companies are getting bashed as well. They're the ones Abetz describes as \"weak-kneed\", and who Abbott has urged to get their \"house in order\". What's happening here is a transference of responsibility: a declaration that our industrial relations are in total disrepair, but that it's not for the government to do anything about it.This, I suspect, is the Abbott government's way of establishing an industrial relations conversation, without having a policy debate on the issue. Abbott knows any discussion of policy will be politically catastrophic. He also faces enormous pressure from within his own movement to take back the territory the Coalition surrendered with John Howard's defeat.The solution seems to be to make it an issue independent of government; to illustrate slowly over time that the system is broken so that reform becomes possible. It's as though Abbott is trying to drag himself kicking and screaming towards a policy. But to do that his illustrations need to have punch. And all that is lost when your illustrations turn out to be caricatures. "], ["Lebanon: Nation with no real unity stuck as proxy for region's conflict", "January 10, 2014", "10", " The National Museum of Beirut houses one of the greatest prehistoric collections in the world. It's here you'll find the earliest example we have of an alphabet in human history.You'll also find astonishing Egyptian-styled sarcophagi topped bizarrely with Greco-Roman faces; a fusion of artistic traditions that demonstrates just what a cultural meeting point this part of the world has always been.What you will not find is anything post-mediaeval.Modern Lebanon just does not exist in its national museum. It cannot exist because the cultures that meet there could never agree on what story should be told.Indeed, the museum's only modern artefact is the bullet hole from the Lebanese civil war that punctures the bottom-left corner of perhaps its most impressive Byzantine mosaic.So it is in Beirut, and indeed Lebanon as a whole. There are Sunni, Christian and Shiite areas, but there are no national areas. Nation-states typically go to great lengths to convey their propaganda to the public, to articulate a national mythology. But Lebanon does not even bother.Beirut has no monuments to independence, founding fathers or national heroes.It does not even have the oversized photos of presidents (or prime ministers) that are so compulsory throughout the Middle East. In Lebanon, modern heroes are sectarian, and modern national symbols are tragic and embody unresolved conflict. Like the Holiday Inn, left gutted and burnt from the civil war, sitting hauntingly among a clutch of shiny downtown high-rises. If there is a national identity in Lebanon, it is so heavily obscured by the bullet holes that very few of its politicians can see it.''Nations which don't find their national identities are doomed to be the prey of other nations.''So declared Ataturk in 1923. He was, of course, speaking with post-Ottoman Turkey in mind but it is hard to imagine a more penetrating description of Lebanon.After decades of watching its politicians play up sectarian divisions and seek support from foreign powers, Lebanon has become not so much a country as a theatre for regional geopolitics.And so the Shiites - most actively represented by Hezbollah - take orders from Iran and the Assad regime in Syria, while Sunnis seek support from Saudi Arabia and embrace Syria's increasingly radical rebels. No group can conceive of its own interests without its foreign patrons: not even Lebanon's Christians, who have floated back to Syria's Bashar al-Assad as their protector against Sunni radicalism.Just this past week, Beirut has had a former finance minister assassinated and a (Sunni) suicide bomber kill five civilians in a Shiite neighbourhood.And yet neither is a domestic Lebanese matter, because almost nothing is. The assassination is most likely an order from Syria, reasserting Assad's will in Lebanon. The suicide bombing is clear retaliation for Hezbollah's involvement in the Syrian civil war, fighting for the Assad regime. It is an involvement that has merely encouraged the same international terrorist groups fighting Assad to start terrorising Lebanon, thereby exposing Hezbollah's claim to be ''resisting'' foreign aggression on behalf of Lebanon as a sham, and making clear that they are merely providing Lebanese muscle for Iran.Saudi Arabia is offering $3 billion to strengthen the Lebanese Army. Its aim seems obvious enough: to gain influence over the only viable military alternative to Hezbollah in Lebanon. Lebanese Sunnis are likely to welcome it, because they would love a Lebanese army sympathetic to their interests. The Shiites, however, are in a bind. Do they really want a strong Lebanese army, or would they prefer it to remain weak enough for Hezbollah to dominate?It boils down to this: Lebanon is a contest between the two real powers of the region - Saudi Arabia and Iran. And in this respect, Lebanon is a microcosm; a place that merely distils the real game of Middle Eastern politics. It is visible in the Syrian civil war, which is far less civil than it seems since it has become a proxy confrontation between Iran and Saudi Arabia, which is cheerfully funding rebel groups, hoping desperately for Assad to fall. It is visible in Saudis' outraged reaction to America's nuclear deal with Iran last November.It is even visible in Iraq where Iran has profited handsomely from America's removal of Saddam Hussein and the emergence of a Shiite government, and where the Saudi government stands accused of funding Sunni terrorist groups which have spectacularly gained control of Fallujah.The Sunni-Shiite divide is now definitive. But it is more manufactured than it first appears: a convenient dividing line the Saudis and Iranians can use to mobilise support. Only recently has this sectarianism become so radioactive. Most deeply, these divisions are political. This is an old story of competing nations - here acting as empires - dividing for conquest.And here we return to Ataturk's dictum. This Saudi-Iran havoc is possible because the Middle East is crammed with countries whose national identities have never truly been resolved; whose borders have been horrifically drawn to capture almost nothing coherent; who shook off colonisation only to discover they did not quite know who they were in these new, often arbitrary political formations. "], ["Tony Abbott running against himself as marathon turns into a sprint", "December 27, 2013", "393", " This year, we've had three prime ministers, Victoria has had two premiers, the Northern Territory has had two chief ministers (and, while we're at it, Catholics have had two Popes). In only one case was an election and a change of government involved.It's possible to see this as the assembly of unconnected coincidences, as though this remarkable tally is to be consigned to the annals of trivia, indicative of nothing. It's possible to explain each of these leadership transitions on its own terms: the Gillard-Rudd fiasco - and Abbott's subsequent ascension - as a function of a dysfunctional Labor Party; Ted Baillieu's demise as the failure of a weak leader; Terry Mills as the victim of a diabolical policy decision to raise electricity prices in the Northern Territory.But in one year? It's as though time is being compressed. I mark this year as one in which the consequences of a public and political culture operating at warp speed started to become clear.Already there's evidence the velocity is set to continue. The Abbott government, having barely been in office 100 days, already trails in the polls. It has enjoyed nothing even approximating a honeymoon period, and more than that has failed to even enjoy a phase of post-election inertia where the electorate looks elsewhere and just sticks with its decision.In falling behind so quickly, the government has set a new record; this despite having taken over from a Labor government that even sympathisers would quietly concede was unelectable, despite facing an opposition that has hardly been rampaging.History says it's very unlikely, but it's possible Abbott will be a one-term prime minister. Like Gillard. And Rudd. Maybe it's too early to say a cross-partisan pattern is emerging in Australian politics, but it's certainly not too early to ask.There are lots of explanations available for the government's early slide. Its botched education policy. Its attempt to trim its media profile runs the risk of looking evasive, particularly on its signature policy area of immigration. The relationship with Indonesia has taken a beating on its watch, even if the spying activity that has so enraged the Indonesians came from Labor's time in office. Coalition MPs have been caught spending taxpayers' money in dubious circumstances.And, perhaps most importantly, Australia never heartily embraced Abbott's Coalition. That much was evident the morning after the election, when it became clear that most of the swing away from Labor and the Greens went to novelty parties, with the Coalition picking up less than a quarter of it.If it's true the electorate never really warmed to Abbott, it's because his style in opposition was so aggressive that there was little warmth to go around. But it's also true that this is exactly the reason he's now Prime Minister. It was a stunningly successful method that had Labor on the ropes for almost an entire electoral term. His critics will say he bludgeoned the electorate with simplistic sloganeering, and that the noise made life impossible for a government running a complex series of arguments. Maybe. But why did it work?I think it's because Abbott's approach was so perfectly suited to the age. Much has been written about the 24-hour news cycle, and the culture of sound-bite politics it generates. All that is true. But the problem is much bigger than that. It's society-wide.Our entire mode of living is now built on speed. We communicate instantly and constantly, and we command an impressive array of gadgets to facilitate this. The very moment we receive news, we're reacting to it, usually with virtual people whose role - either as ideological friend or foe - is pre-determined.A political development is not as important as the immediate argument we intend to prosecute with it. We've arranged ourselves into teams, and we take our cues from our teammates. We're becoming captive to a kind of digital tribalism.This is a whole new sociology, and it brings with it a whole new politics of obstinate, snap judgment. Put simply, we commit too hard, too early. That's why political parties take the huge step of replacing leaders so much quicker than they used to. They know we're not really for turning any more. And that's because, while we're smothered with information, we simply don't have time to digest it.But since we all have megaphones now, it's unthinkable to be silent; to have nothing to say. So we make noise. And, in the process, what we're losing as a society is the capacity for reflection.That is a social environment fundamentally suited to the task of opposition. Abbott seemed to know that instinctively. He asked us to judge, rather than reflect. And he set up rapidly digestible templates to help us make those snap judgments. Templates that would undermine any government, like: unpredictability and crises in government are a result of incompetence. Hence ''no surprises, no excuses''. Thus did he vanquish two prime ministers.Now, as his government faces its own surprises, and necessarily must find the odd excuse, it fails its own tests from opposition. Sure, every government is wobbly early, and there's every chance this one will find its feet and recover. But if it doesn't, it could be that Tony Abbott is his own third scalp. "], ["Holden demise the price of a global economy", "December 13, 2013", "159", " In the short term, there's no consistency in politics. Back when the Gillard government announced the carbon tax, it took about six seconds for the Coalition to scream this would cost jobs and devastate entire towns. Bollocks, retorted Labor, occasionally by way of karaoke.Sure, some industries would be hit, but they were the kind of industries the environment needed us to scale back. Meanwhile, we would create shiny, eco-friendly jobs. People would retrain and find new opportunities. The workforce was adaptable and dynamic.Now, with nobody really noticing, Labor and the Coalition seem to have swapped positions. As Labor inspects the carcass of the Australian car industry, it foreshadows monstrous job losses, the devastation of manufacturing towns in South Australia and Victoria, and protests that you can't simply ask people who have spent their lives assembling cars suddenly to work in nursing homes. And the Coalition is suddenly brimming with confidence that these things are always transient, evolving and ultimately leave us stronger.But in the long run, things are far more consistent than all that. The truth is that the death of Australian car making did not begin on election day, September 7, but 30 years ago, when the Hawke government began abolishing tariffs and opening us to global competition.This was declared a necessary step in Australia's economic evolution. It would bring growth, dynamism and, after some pain, prosperity.When Labor today argues the Coalition is sacrificing blue-collar workers at the altar of an economic theory, it omits that, in Australia, Labor was that very theory's midwife. Ask Paul Keating. Actually, don't bother. He's already given his answer when asked what he'd say to blue-collar workers whose jobs disappeared on his watch: \"What do I say? 'What's your new job like.' … I mean, did we ever hurt anybody liberating them from the car assembly line?\"For now, an argument rages on whether more government money would have saved Holden. The opposition insists $150 million would have done it. The government points out that Holden, like Ford before it, has been \"saved\" in this manner several times before, only to be unsaved and threaten to leave again. The truth is we'll never know because Holden won't tell us, and even if it did, it would be guessing.Either way, the government's argument is interesting because it boils down to the assertion that there is nothing it could reasonably have done to prevent this; that this decision was out of its hands and was based on economic factors largely beyond its control. But in defending itself, the government has made an epic admission: that we're not really in control of our economy.And that much is the heretical truth. We chose to make it true when we threw our lot in with the global free market. We'll never admit this in stark terms. We'll continue to argue over each sensational development such as this week's. But the grander theme cannot be resisted: we do not call our own shots; no longer is there a hierarchy with the nation-state on top and everyone else - corporations, civil society and citizens - below.Power is shared now. Companies play countries off against each other looking for the best deal, much as we haggle over a shop purchase. Our world isn't exactly borderless - and some countries are more protectionist than others - but those borders now seem to denote zones rather than dominions. The world is a country now, and nations are its cities.That's where the difficulties start. The idea of an economy is that people can move within it, that labour flows to where it is most needed. In the case of car making, our workers just aren't needed. Not because they're not good at what they do, but because countless other people are good at it, too, and for a fraction of the cost.It's not just Australia experiencing this. Take Japan, that car-making behemoth. It's lost about a quarter of its industry in the past five years. Even South Korea, whose workers earn about half of what ours do, has been in decline since 2011. These cars are now made in China and Thailand. Cheaply.Remember Gina Rinehart's declaration that Australia can't compete while Africans are prepared to work for $2 per day? The problem with her argument is not that she's wrong. It's that, by the global free market's own lights, she is scandalously right.Those lights tell us to specialise; to do what we can do better, or cheaper than anyone else. That's the logic we've embraced. Just last week we signed a free trade agreement with South Korea, which both major parties had worked on. The upshot: great for agriculture, bad for car making. Labor didn't quibble. Trade Minister Andrew Robb said the agreement was about \"backing our strengths\". That's what we do now.But nations are diverse. People within them have a huge range of skills. Globalisation's demand that every nation specialise sits in contradiction with the social fact that not everyone is well placed to fit within our specialties. The market has its solution to that, too: labour mobility. You either acquire new skills or go where your skills will be rewarded. But the social and political reality is more complicated. Perpetual reskilling is expensive and not always successful, and Holden's workforce isn't about to move to Thailand.The larger story here isn't really about our car industry, or whether we could have delayed Holden's decision to some other day. It's about the fact our politics don't match our economics: that the assumptions of a hyper-specialised global free market and its effortlessly mobile labour force don't reflect the more diversified, comparatively static nature of our societies.Twenty years from now, Holden's departure will be just another marker on a journey the direction of which is clear and irreversible. We'll continue shedding industries. We'll continue developing new ones.But no one can honestly guarantee the same people harmed in the first process will be rescued by the second. And the political heat this generates will merely disguise the fact that this is a matter of political consensus. Waleed Aly presents Drive on Radio National. "], ["NSW bill is about marriage, just not equality", "November 1, 2013", "193", " Amid all the pyrotechnics surrounding same-sex marriage this week, it's important to remember that this is overwhelmingly a symbolic debate. That doesn't mean it's unimportant. Symbolism matters to us in a visceral way, sometimes even more than substance. That is why flag-burning is such a provocative act. But it's important to know when something is symbolic so we can assess what has or hasn't been achieved.It's true there are real, substantive issues of discrimination at play. Same-sex couples don't have the same rights and entitlements as married heterosexual ones do on a range of things: workers' compensation death benefits, pensions for the partners of Defence Force veterans, access to carer's leave for example. It's true same-sex marriage would quickly remedy this. But it's also true that you could remove that discrimination by amending the way those entitlements work without even thinking about same-sex marriage. And if you did that, marriage equality activists would still want to change the definition of marriage, and their opponents would still resist them. In fact, their opponents would probably be happy to give same-sex couples all those rights if they'd just leave marriage alone.That's why the ACT government found itself in court this week, defending its marriage equality legislation from the federal government's legal attack, why a same-sex marriage bill was debated in NSW Parliament on Thursday (though Premier Barry O'Farrell has indicated he will not support a state same-sex marriage bill, only a federal one), and why the Tasmanian upper house ultimately decided not to proceed with similar legislation of its own. None of these laws, which could operate only at state and territory levels, remedy same-sex discrimination in a stroke. They are political acts designed to make symbolic, political statements.This is clearest in the case of the ACT legislation which, one way or another, is doomed to failure. Even if it wins in the High Court, the federal government can - and almost certainly will - override the legislation because it has the power to do that to a territory. The ACT will have opened the way for states, but territorians must surely know that every marriage they contract under this legislation will one day be annulled. The ACT government surely knows this, too. It isn't looking for a substantive result; it's trying to apply pressure to the federal government.But something strange has arisen this week in the attempt to do that. So strong is the sense that marriage equality's moment is approaching, and so frenzied is the race to get there, that marriage equality advocates have begun, in a remarkable way, to argue against their own position.The ACT's present fight with the federal government comes down to whether or not the Federal Marriage Act is intended to be a comprehensive statement on the definition of marriage, which precludes the states having anything to say on the matter. If so, the laws are inconsistent and the federal law prevails. This is for the High Court to decide, and while the ACT certainly has a chance of winning, there's no doubt it's vulnerable. At least, that is the view of Bret Walker, SC, one of the country's best constitutional lawyers, who has been advising Australian Marriage Equality. But, he says, the NSW bill and its (now defunct) Tasmanian counterpart are on stronger ground.The key difference is that those bills don't attempt to redefine marriage. In fact, they avoid legislating on marriage at all. Instead they create a new species of legal relationship that happens to be called ''same-sex marriage''. Since this is not the same thing as ''marriage'' in the meaning of federal law, it can't be treading on federal toes.It's a neat legal technique. It's a strong legal argument. The only problem for marriage equality activists is that it completely undermines the cause. This is not simply a small matter of language. It's about changing the whole concept of the legislation.The very purpose of marriage equality is to extend the definition of marriage so it is blind to gender. That's what the ACT bill is attempting to do. And that's exactly what you don't do by sidestepping this process and creating an entirely new social construct that just happens to have ''marriage'' in its name. A ''same-sex marriage'' is just a civil union by a more political name.Really, you can call it what you like - a ''consolation marriage'' might be most honest - you've done nothing to change the legal definition of marriage. A legally rigorous man still couldn't turn to his boyfriend and ask: ''Will you marry me?'' It would have to be: ''Will you same-sex marry me?'' In that way, the NSW bill might offer same-sex marriage, but it's not offering marriage equality. It's a bit like republicans finally replacing the monarch with a system of hereditary, foreign-born presidents.As symbolic achievements go, that would be relatively anaemic. But now you have marriage equality activists, who are typically uninspired by the prospect of civil unions, pleading with the ACT government to enact precisely that, and reacting angrily when it refuses to do so.Take independent NSW MP Alex Greenwich's warning that ''it is not going to be Tony Abbott, it is not going to be the High Court that will be blamed for the invalidation of these marriages, it will be the ACT government that will be blamed''. Perhaps. But the ACT's response would surely be that at least they had marriages to annul.Meanwhile, opponents of marriage equality, who frequently offer civil unions as some kind of compromise, seem not to have seen the opportunity. They're delighting in their victory in Tasmania, but the onward march of same-sex marriage - which transcends traditional partisan or conservative/progressive lines - suggests that victory can only be pyrrhic.Perhaps their best strategy would be to limit same-sex marriage to consolation, state-level status, especially if their opponents seem happy with that. One look at the NSW and Tasmanian bills and they should be should be leaping on them, screaming: ''Deal! Are we done now?'' "], ["Allah edict masks power play", "October 18, 2013", "38", " Six years ago, Proton - Malaysia's national car maker - teamed up with car makers in Iran and Turkey pledging to develop the world's first ''Islamic car''. Apparently automobiles had hitherto been non-Muslims. If that's not absurd enough, this week we learnt it's a good thing Malaysian cars can't talk, because if they could, they'd no longer be able to use the word ''Allah'' to mean ''God''. That's what a Malaysian appeal court ruled this week, after a Catholic, Malay-language newspaper had dared to drop the A-bomb.The ''Allah'' controversy has been running for years and isn't over yet. This decision overturned the original finding from 2009 in favour of the newspaper. Now the editor is planning to appeal to the highest court in the country and the government will resist. This immediately reminded me of Proton's Islamic car: strip both these stories of the pious language that decorates them, and they're ultimately about the maintenance of Malay pride. These are symbolic gestures of ethno-nationalism. And that whole issue is becoming increasingly radioactive in Malaysian politics and society.To see this, consider what precisely makes the Islamic car so ''Islamic'': compartments for storing a headscarf and Koran, and a compass to indicate the direction of Mecca. That's it. As though no car in history has sported a compass or storage. If you're in any doubt about how thin this Islamic veneer is, consider that Proton was considering a ''secular'' version for non-Muslim markets. This is not about function. It's not meeting a consumer need. This is appealing to consumer identity. It's selling a feeling of authenticity. Don't just be a Muslim, be very Muslim. The content of that commitment matters far less than the statement it makes.The ''Allah'' imbroglio is altogether more serious, but no less strange. Arab Christians, Jews and pagans were using the word before Islam came along. The word has always appeared in Arabic translations of the Bible without controversy. The same ultimately came to be true in the Malay language, which incorporates plenty of Arabic lexicon. So it's hardly surprising that Malaysian Christians have been using the word, too. For longer than Malaysia has existed, as it happens. It's in their Bibles, too.Why should this suddenly be a problem? The Malaysian court held that Allah ''is not an integral part of the faith in Christianity'' and that therefore its use in a Catholic newspaper ''will cause confusion in the community''. The fear, apparently, is that Muslims will suddenly start practising Christianity if both faith groups refer to God by the same name. Malaysian Muslims therefore need a form of protection from their own ignorance that no Muslim community has needed anywhere at any time.But this isn't about that. If it were, you'd expect Malaysia's Islamist opposition party (PAS) to be at the forefront of this charge. But it is not. Indeed, it is mildly opposed. This is instead about an old guard of Malays (who are officially always Muslims) confronting the fact that the privileged position they've held for the first 50 years of Malaysian independence simply can't hold for the next 50.Now they're lashing out, as if trying to resist the death throes of their own supremacy.That supremacy is a matter of law. Indeed, it's in the constitution, which establishes Malay quotas for entry into civil service, public education and access to federal business licences. The idea was partly that Malays - who were vastly economically disadvantaged - would gain ground on the far wealthier Chinese. When the British drafted this law, the intention was that it would be temporary. Turns out it wasn't, and race has been a constant inflammation point in Malaysian politics ever since, as several race riots demonstrate.The ruling party, UMNO, is a great defender of this privilege. For decades it has served them well. But that edifice crumbled in 2008, when it lost an astonishing 58 seats and barely carried the popular vote. This year it lost even that, and clings to power only thanks to a brazen gerrymander.Its only solution seems to be to divide and conquer: to sell the image of a Malaysia where Malay supremacy is threatened by insurrectionist minorities - and, indeed, where its own power is falling victim to a ''Chinese tsunami''. Its newspapers boomed headlines such as ''What else do the Chinese want?'' and ''Chinese voters are two-faced''. Little wonder, then, the government's non-Malay vote is now almost non-existent.But it's the diving Malay vote that is most interesting. Young, educated, urban Malays in particular are deserting this brand of politics in droves. They're becoming increasingly sceptical of their own privileged status. For all the affirmative action, they remain behind economically. Special access to government contracts has simply meant that Malays with good (often familial) government connections get rich, while the majority watch on from their scarcely adequate dwellings. What began as empowerment ended in corruption.I don't know what became of the Islamic car. I've found barely a trace of it since it was announced. Maybe it was never made, because a new conception of Malaysia was made instead, a step removed from the identity politics of the colonial era, full of upwardly mobile people unlikely to be swayed by a Mecca-oriented compass. That's the problem with being a car maker: you have to accept social evolution at some point. You can't really gerrymander your way to a profit. "], ["Republicans stuck in reality they created", "October 4, 2013", "73", " Contrary to obvious appearances, the Republicans in Congress who this week forced the US government into a coma are not insane. That doesn't mean this wasn't an insane result. It was, on almost every level. That includes the level of pure politics, with polling showing predictably that Americans see no need for this mess, and even Republicans acknowledging the electorate will blame them, not President Barack Obama.They know this because that's what happened the last time they tried this in 1995, handing a struggling Bill Clinton a political gift he took to a landslide victory in 1996. The Republicans are not merely holding a gun to the nation's head, they're holding one to their own.But that doesn't make individual Republicans ''lemmings with suicide vests'', as one of their own colleagues described them. It's not that simple. As individuals, Republican politicians are embracing this insanity for perfectly sane reasons. And that's the problem: the political system is now such that Republicans keep their jobs by making the party increasingly unelectable.This week's farce has its roots in 2010 when Republicans swept their way to majorities in both houses of Congress. It was a stunning return from exile, after Democrats had banished them from every limb of the government in 2008. But then Republicans tried to entrench their position through a colossal gerrymander. Several Republican-controlled states proceeded to redraw their electoral boundaries to make Democrat success nigh on impossible. And it worked.By 2012, results in the House of Representatives were so skewed that the Republicans comfortably maintained their majority despite the fact that Democrat candidates received more than 1 million more votes. Take Pennsylvania, where Democrats won nearly 51 per cent of the vote, but Republicans won 13 seats to five. Or Michigan, where the Democrat vote was nearly 53 per cent while Republicans took almost twice as many seats. North Carolina: 51-49 to the Democrats but nine Republican seats to four. And on it goes. That sort of result landed in at least 10 states - only one of which was rigged to favour the Democrats. To get a sense of the scale of it, consider that in the seven states redrawn by Republicans, near parity voting (16.7 million votes to 16.4 million) delivered 73 Republicans and 34 Democrats.That's a clear perversion of democracy, and it's no accident. The Republican State Leadership Committee made it explicit. It ran a $30 million project called Redmap, aimed at winning key seats at the state level which would give it the power to draw electoral boundaries. What's more, it planned to do this in a census year so it could draw with precision - 2010 was exactly such a year.So the plan worked. The Republicans played the system. But now the system is playing them. Sure, Republicans look set to control the house well into the future. But in the American system, the political contest doesn't simply vanish. It shifts to the primaries. Now if you're a Republican house member, your greatest threat comes not from Democrats, but from other Republican challengers hungry for your seat. The result is that Republicans are talking more to their own base, and less to everyone else.Old school Republicans might shake their heads at the rising rabidity of their Tea Party colleagues, but the truth is they're presently no match for them. The last thing an aspiring congressional Republican needs is a well-funded lobby group running campaigns lacerating them as closet socialists prepared to deal with a rampantly socialist Obama. Freed from the need to defeat any meaningful Democrat challenge, Republican politics is now such that everyone's racing to outbid each other for the mantle of true believer.It's a classic case of a closed system encouraging ever more radical posturing.It doesn't get much more radical than trying to bring the government down. And that's the real concern here: what if this isn't really about Obamacare at all? What if the government shutdown itself is the goal? Truth be told, Republican candidates have been talking about doing this since 2010. Then it wasn't necessarily about Obamacare.It was just as likely about budget cuts - \"a down payment on fiscal sanity\" in that well-worn Republican phrase sometimes shouted before rallying crowds chanting \"cut it or shut it\". Either way the subtext has always been the same: that shutting down the government would be a good thing rather than the kind of dysfunction that, say, in a country like ours happens once in a hundred years and causes a government to be dismissed.America's problem is even more serious than it appears. America is now two artificially created countries, operating in parallel. There's the country that chooses presidents, and the one that can only rail righteously against them. The country where funding the government is a matter of sensible routine, and the country where shutting down the government is a badge of pride, a slogan you can sell. The Republican Party is going to have to figure out which country it wants to rule because these countries cannot be reconciled.They won't be until every state hands over the power to draw electoral boundaries to an independent, non-political body. In the meantime, the Republican Party is trapped in a bubble largely of its own making. "], ["Abbott sexism gibes miss the point", "September 20, 2013", "174", " When acting Opposition Leader Chris Bowen quipped this week that there were now more women in Afghanistan's cabinet than Australia's, he must have known the line would stick. In fact it seems to have inspired an entire genre of commentary. Witness Steph Harmon's viral post on Junkee listing \"Things That Have More Women In Them Than Tony Abbott's Cabinet\": Zoo Weekly's staff meeting; the Saudi Arabia Olympic team; the Iranian cabinet; Tony Abbott's immediate family. And on it goes. One bright spark on Twitter pointed out that Julia Gillard's first cabinet had more prime ministers than Abbott's has women.It's funny. It's sharp. It's a point amusingly and efficiently made. That is, until you stop and think about it. Beyond the clear rhetorical effect, what actually is the point? That this cabinet is embarrassingly male? Sure. But then what? What precise conclusion about this is being urged upon us?I suspect the conclusion is all about Tony Abbott. This, you sense, is the anti-Abbott sector's smoking gun, the evidence that proves his sexism once and for all. \"He simply cannot accept women as equals and can only relate to them … as wives, mothers and daughters,\" declares Tim Dunlop on The Drum, neatly capturing this approach.I very much doubt Bowen is suggesting women's interests are less represented in Australia than in Afghanistan. But I have little doubt he's prodding us to wonder whether Abbott would change that if he had his way. The point is to present Abbott as the ultimate regressive: the misogynist homophobe from yesteryear trying desperately to drag us back to some darker age. That's why Labor is so keen to point out Abbott's is the first cabinet without a dedicated science minister since 1931.This brand of argument is pointless for at least two reasons. First, it has been thoroughly agitated by Abbott's foes for years now. A couple of weeks ago the nation either rejected it as untrue or deemed it an irrelevance. That Abbott has kept his male-dominated shadow cabinet largely in place - pretty much as he said he would - is unlikely to cause Australians to revise their judgment wildly.But second (and most importantly) it misses the point. This isn't about Tony Abbott. It's much bigger than that. It's not even just about gender. There's a broader philosophy at work here that calls into question our society's ability to deal with disadvantage of just about any kind.\"I never want to see affirmative action,\" affirmed Bronwyn Bishop in defence of Abbott's cabinet choices. She recounted her struggle to become a NSW senator when no woman had done so previously. \"They didn't choose me then but I didn't go away and whinge about it either. I just worked hard so they chose me subsequently.\"It's a neat, if austere theory of success that comes very much from the Liberal Party's philosophical heart. Hard work is rewarded. Success is in the hands of the individual. This is why Bronwyn Bishop maintains Julia Gillard's misogyny speech was \"disgraceful\" because it \"was playing the victim\". This view of society doesn't see victims - at least not on the basis of, say, gender, race or class. It sees individuals who bear the responsibility of their own plight.This is the downside of liberalism, where society is boiled down to individuals and the choices they make. This promises equality of a sort, because it prevents, say, an individual from a despised minority from having to conform to the majority's prejudice. But this also means society's most powerful people are freed from the claims of its least powerful. So women might be free to break the bonds of their traditional gender roles, but if they find they're excluded from the most senior positions by an informal boys' club, then liberalism will probably have little to offer them. After all, these boys are free to associate informally, and barring the most overt discrimination, are free to work with whomever they fancy. Liberalism might save you from formalised slavery, but it will hardly storm the barricades of inherited privilege. In fact, it hardly notices them.This is a quandary facing any liberation movement in a liberal society, of which feminism is only the most newsy example of the moment. Part of the agenda is always to maximise choice, which is why freedom of choice is probably our society's most definitive value. Liberalism has been a useful tool for claiming rights. But the logic on which that rests ultimately keeps glass ceilings in place. Choice is the opposite of coercion, and only coercion is likely to shatter the glass.It's not hard to find senior businessmen who will extol the virtues of more women in senior business roles, for instance. Some can even point to the obstacles to this utopia - such as the absence of suitable childcare arrangements. But ask them to pay more tax to fund those arrangements and they'll laugh at you. Ask them to take on a quota and they might even fume. After all, it compromises their freedom of choice. But if we make these choices from vastly unequal positions, then on balance the interests of the powerful are likely to prevail, and the status quo proceed mostly undisturbed. That's not a matter of a sexist individual here and there. It's a matter of structural disadvantage.That's why so few women are on our top corporate boards, despite mountains of research showing companies with diverse boards will do better. It's why the faces on our televisions - or indeed in our Parliament - remain overwhelmingly white even as our society has become hypercoloured. And it's why, for all the lamenting of the absence of women in Abbott's cabinet, that cabinet is still able to make history by appointing Julie Bishop Australia's first female foreign affairs minister.Clearly, that history is easy to make. It will remain that way as long as we have no language to use other than one of choice and freedom; as long as our politics becomes about individual leaders and the choices they make rather than the broader questions of the way our society works. So many of those presently railing at Abbott would probably proudly describe themselves as small-l liberals. But would they understand the limits of what they're saying? Waleed Aly presents Drive on Radio National. "], ["The whole point of detention for asylum seekers is horror, whether it is acknowledged or not", "February 21, 2014", "311", " Sorry, but we don't get to be outraged at this. The fact that a person is dead, that another has been shot or that yet another has a fractured skull doesn't change anything.Immigration Minister Scott Morrison is undoubtedly right when he describes this violent episode on Manus Island as a ''terrible tragedy''. In fact, he's more right than he knows. Tragedy, in the Greek sense, unfolds as an inevitability. The very thing that makes the tragic hero so tragic is that his fate is sealed, his demise is clear, but he continues to take every step that leads him there. And in the case of Manus Island, that is exactly where we are.We don't get to be outraged because this violence, with its brutal, deadly consequences, is inherent. We chose it, even if we've refused at every stage to acknowledge that. It is the very logic of our asylum seeker policy - which is built on the sole rationality of deterrence - to create horror. We're banking on it.So now, let us make this calculus finally explicit: whatever these people are fleeing, whatever circumstance makes them think they'd be better off chancing death on boats hardly worthy of that description, we must offer them something worse. That something is Papua New Guinea.The worse it is, the more effective it is destined to be, and the more it fulfils the philosophical intentions of the policy. This tragedy is not any kind of evidence of policy failure. It is, in fact, the very best form of deterrence. This is what it looks like when the policy works.For now, we're busily piecing together exactly what happened. Hence the immediate calls for an inquiry. We assemble the facts as a necessary ritual, but it's ultimately an irrelevance. If it turns out that these asylum seekers were set upon by the PNG police or by locals, what difference will it really make? It will merely have demonstrated what we have long known: that PNG is a highly dangerous, deeply unliveable country, racked by lawlessness and violence. The capital, Port Moresby, is routinely listed among the least liveable cities on the planet. Last year, The Economist had it third-worst, besting only Damascus and Dhaka, and therefore ranking below most of the cities these detainees have fled. And that's the reason the policy of transferring boat people to PNG is meant to work: because we're pointedly not offering these people protection if they're found to be refugees.And if the detainees are found to have triggered the violence? No doubt such a finding would be useful fodder for those determined to present them as villains, undeserving of our sympathy or protection. That, after all, is the narrative that surrounds asylum seekers whenever this sort of thing happens. But that only highlights an essential fact: this sort of thing keeps happening.Labor, unable to criticise the policy that has delivered us this death because it is theirs, can only present this as some kind of managerial problem; as evidence that the Abbott government is mismanaging the centre. But riotous violence happened repeatedly on its watch, in Nauru and Villawood, as in Baxter and Woomera previously. Onshore, offshore, it didn't matter. Labor's objections - even in this utterly lame, limp form - are political and disingenuous.When social behaviour repeats itself like this, we have two explanations open to us. One is that this is a coincidence of sorts: that it is nothing more than the misbehaviour of immoral individuals gaming the system, and that these individuals merely happen to pop up repeatedly.This is very much the explanation favoured by officialdom - from both major parties - who immediately declare these rioters to have failed any decent character test, having revealed themselves as criminally inclined.The other explanation is that there is something about the circumstances of detainees that generates this behaviour. Put any group of people through this wringer, and they will eventually respond with riotous protest. Such behaviour, then, is not a function of the defective personalities of individuals, but the inevitable human reaction to inhuman treatment: that the violence we've witnessed over and over is simply a product of the system.Naturally, officials cannot abide this. Certainly, they are keen on talking about our ''system'', and preserving its integrity. But they present it as entirely passive; as a set of rules and processes that facilitate orderly management, rather than something active in its own right. As far as politicians are concerned, our systems don't have consequences.This, of course, is bollocks. But it's bipartisan bollocks, so for most relevant purposes it masquerades as truth.That's why we're blind to it. We respond to a detainee killed, but seem far less moved by the several to have committed suicide, as though they are somehow less dead.Through it all we maintain the heroic ability to exonerate ourselves through the fiction that we played no part in their misery, or that those who riot are immorally cynical. But the cynicism is ours. Even the briefest sampling of commercial talkback radio this week revealed a streak within us that sees a detainee's death merely as comeuppance. The political truth is that there is almost nothing any government could do that the electorate would deem too brutal, which is precisely how we got here.A poll last month had 60 per cent of us urging the Abbott government to ''increase the severity'' of our policies towards asylum seekers. That's not a pragmatic policy judgment. We find something cathartic about this official form of violence.The truth is we've never really come to terms with why it is people get on boats, and why it is that, faced with hopeless inaction once they're detained, they protest. In fact, our public conversation isn't even terribly interested in knowing. That's why, when we do finally discover the facts of Manus, they will mean nothing. "], ["Labor wins the debate, Abbott eyes the prize", "September 6, 2013", "78", " It started with pious calls for ''consensus politics''. Remember them? How Bob Katter enthused about a ''new paradigm''? Julia Gillard called for a ''new politics'', which I can only assume was roughly equivalent to Tony Abbott's ''kinder, gentler polity''.Then followed the most bitter, cantankerous Parliament in generations, in which every mere breath would be contested.Now, after all that exhausting, dispiriting muck, the end result has been a quite astonishing consensus. At the eleventh hour, and almost without anyone noticing, the biggest disagreements of the past three years (the carbon tax aside) have been dissolved. Perhaps most astonishingly, several of them have been resolved in favour of the Labor government we now look set to eject.On Saturday the country will elect a party with an expensive national broadband network policy. It will vote for a party that will significantly increase education funding, at least for four years. And it will elect a party that has resolved that the best way to handle asylum seekers arriving by boat is just to kick them out so some other country has to deal with them. Sure, differences remain between the parties on these issues. Some of these differences even matter: there are still fights to be had. But they are now over matters of detail rather than essence.You know something is happening when Abbott is explicitly spruiking a ''unity ticket'' with Kevin Rudd on education funding (even though he fails to match Labor for the most expensive years of the Gonski plan).All this is a long way from the days when the NBN was a ''white elephant'' - a ''colossal waste of taxpayers' money'' that the Coalition had solemnly pledged to ''dismantle''. Now, as Alan Kohler observed when the Coalition finally proposed an alternative NBN of its own, ''Malcolm Turnbull's great achievement over the past 2½ years has been to save the national broadband network''. It's a long way, too, from Christopher Pyne's dismissal of Gonski as ''a conski''; from his insistence that ''the status quo is a better model'' of education funding, before unabashedly declaring ''Labor should have been doing this last year'' and deciding to ''adopt exactly the same funding envelope as Labor''.But the grandest, most Damascene conversion has come on fiscal policy. For years the Coalition has held Labor at gunpoint, demanding a return to surplus as some kind of litmus test for good government. For years, and for reasons unfathomable, Labor has played along. Having taken the perfectly defensible Keynesian path of running a deficit to stimulate the economy during a global recession, it became so obsessed with proving its deficit was temporary that it simply forgot to argue its case.The entire economic conversation revolved around a promised return to surplus by 2012-13. Nothing could divert Labor from this course. Not even a gigantic natural disaster such as the Queensland floods in 2011. If ever there was a reason - or even an excuse - to shelve the surplus and build the nation, this was it. Instead, Labor introduced a levy, pledged to cut spending and held fast to a promise no economist seemed to think was a good idea, and which it could never keep. The scene was bizarre. In its zealous search for a surplus, Labor kept trying to find cuts to government spending. This, of course, deflates the economy. So the Reserve Bank was frantically cutting interest rates in an attempt to stimulate. Here we had two institutions beavering away at cancelling each other out.Even when it became clear last year that both company profits and wages were falling - effectively destroying the government's tax revenue - Labor still insisted it could cut its way to surplus. By Christmas it had to concede. The surplus, once a holy grail and unexplained economic necessity, became an irresponsible goal that would compromise ''jobs and growth''. And thus ended one of Labor's most foolhardy, damaging attempts to appease the Coalition.Only now, the Coalition has converted, too. The most underrated phrase of this entire campaign was Joe Hockey's plan for ''appropriate stimulus'', even if that meant we'd have to forget about the surplus for a while. This is the same Coalition that seemed so resolutely not to believe in stimulus that it argued against it even during the financial crisis. Well, forget that. We're all Keynesians now.Rudd can argue all he likes that Abbott will cut the economy to shreds and plunge it into recession but he has two problems. First, this contradicts everything Labor was telling us when it insisted it would find whatever cuts were necessary to deliver that surplus. Second, Abbott has freed himself from the shackles of finding a surplus, thus allowing him to shelve spending cuts until there's no danger of a recession. He has manoeuvred this beautifully, as Labor should have done from the start.All this is a testament to the brutal efficiency of Abbott's opposition.He's quite prepared to bludgeon the government with an argument he later rejects. It's shameless but it works because he does it with confidence and a straight face. Contrast Labor, which has spent far too much time answering the Coalition's charges rather than telling its own story, in its own political terms. If it falls, it will certainly leave a legacy: disability insurance, broadband, Gonski. But we won't really know what that legacy means because it has never really told us. Besides, these are Coalition policies now, too. In so many ways, Labor has won the arguments it refused to have, and for which it will receive no reward. "], ["Unedifying campaigns are now the new norm", "August 23, 2013", "107", " Kevin Rudd and Tony Abbott are formidably intelligent men who have subordinated their IQs to the crushing pragmatism of modern politics. Politicians have always done this to some degree but the fact it is being done so comprehensively this time tells us something far more important about our political culture than anything that will happen on September 7.Consider what this election is about. The Coalition's big-ticket items are a 1.5 per cent company tax cut and a paid parental leave scheme that is more than three years old. The government's biggest idea came on day one: $500 million more in funding for the car industry. Since then it has run a bizarre campaign against a GST increase no one is proposing and which Abbott has ruled out in emphatic terms, and peppered the opposition with questions about its costings.These issues aren't entirely trivial. But if they are the grandest questions we're being asked to consider in this campaign, we're clearly in a world of micro-politics - a world where the controversies are over small matters of detail rather than large questions of vision. I can summarise the parry and thrust: the arguments each side is deploying against the other, and which ones are going unanswered. But what I cannot do, is tell you what either party would like Australia to look like in 30 years: what they think should be transformed, what should be forgone and what should be preserved.That couldn't be said of 2007, when John Howard tried to change industrial relations like never before and Rudd spoke fluently about responding to climate change and tackling the skills shortage. Both leaders told us what they thought was wrong with the country and how they'd go about fixing it. That campaign had its vacuous features - Grocery Watch comes to mind - but the stakes were far from confected. This year's campaign is much more like 2010, when the parties competed in telling us how much they didn't like population growth while both supported remarkably expansionary immigration programs, and when Labor's climate change policy was to have none and ask the punters to figure it out in the form of a citizens' assembly. Everyone lamented 2010. That campaign became shorthand for politics at its most substance-free and uninspiring. Now it has some competition. We should be genuinely alarmed that such Seinfeldian history is repeating because now we have reason to ask if this is a permanent condition.I fear it is. In saying this, I'm aware that we're in unusual times. Twice now we've had a change of prime minister on the eve of the campaign. We've had minority government for three years. But these circumstances, too, are products of the age. In the same time that two prime ministers have been axed, so has a Victorian premier and a chief minister in the Northern Territory. It's both sides of politics and it's happening with outrageous speed.I see two reasons for our malaise. The first is our incurable tendency to view politics in terms of personal cost and benefit. We in the media promote this every year when we present the budget as the answer to the question ''what's in it for you?'' Politicians reinforce it with every handout to people who don't need it, every opportunistic tirade on behalf of anyone who loses an entitlement and with every contrived attempt to ''feel our pain'' about the cost of living, when our real incomes have been rising for years (just not as quickly as our material demands). The end result is an approach to reform that means everyone must win all the time: a politics that pretends not to be about choices and trade-offs. Thus, when Labor wanted to reform education funding, it had to promise no one would be worse off - even the richest, best-resourced schools. Hence Gonski's massive bill, which Abbott, of course, has eventually agreed to pay. But it is precisely this political logic - where we are trained to see ourselves as clients of the state - that prevent him from detailing costings that will inevitably create losers, at least until the last feasible moment.The second problem is about how we communicate. Much has been written about the 24-hour news cycle and its hollowing out of politics to a series of grabs and slogans. All that is true, but I think the problem is more comprehensive than that. Truth be told, not all political coverage is shallow and this campaign has seen something of a renewed rigour. Fact-checking projects are the new fashion (see Fairfax, the ABC and The Conversation). The ABC is running a Vote Compass that plots your own political persuasion against the policy positions of the three biggest political parties. You can compare yourself with them issue by issue. If you look around you'll find maps showing the leaders' every move around the country. In short, there's more information, more readily available to voters, than ever.These are welcome, even exciting initiatives, especially for the politically engaged. But we're naive to think they will affect politicians' behaviour, or in any other way rescue our politics from its present shallowness. The problem of our age is that we have too much information and nowhere near enough time or wisdom to evaluate it. So we have little choice but to select those things that most arouse our particular obsessions.Perhaps it's the intricacies of Rudd's pink batts scandal. Perhaps it's the precise size of the savings the Coalition will have to find to fund its promises. Either way it will most likely be microscopic because the more information we have, the harder it is to organise it around a few compelling themes. That is the job of politicians. But big ideas have a habit of creating losers they dare not talk about. The circle completes itself. "], ["There's a paradox at the heart of the PNG plan", "July 26, 2013", "2", " There's something about the font that dominates the federal government's new asylum seeker policy advertisements. Something about the harsh stencilling effect and the rough black markings that punctuate the stark, white letters. It's like it's forged from metal: rugged, weathered, ultimately indestructible. ''You won't be settled in Australia''. It doesn't scream it. It simply declares it with a kind of closed-minded, bureaucratic rigidity. It's not advising you. It's telling you, in a shockingly impersonal ''access denied'' sort of way. There's no point yelling back at it, because there's no one to yell at.That makes it tough. It's more than an affectation: it's a philosophy. The grammar of our public conversation simply assumes an asylum seeker policy must be tough to be effective. And since a policy of total exclusion is about as tough as it gets, this policy is as effective as it gets.This line of reasoning, it seems, is invincible. This week we learnt that PNG Prime Minister Peter O'Neill wanted asylum seekers ''to move around freely within the community'' rather than be confined to what, if Dateline  is to be believed, is a hellhole of a detention centre. That hellhole was our idea because we've made harshness the very point, the very mark of successful policy. That's why the opposition can find no criticism of the government's new policy as a matter of principle, and has resorted instead to posing with retired major generals and talking about stopping boats with a 3-star military commander. Exactly what that commander will do is unclear, and isn't the point. The point is that it is so tough it looks and sounds like war.But the austere facade masks the fact that this reasoning is an entirely closed loop. For all our harshness, the boats have kept coming. But instead of taking stock, we decide this means we simply need to be harsher. So even as another boat sinks bound for Christmas Island, claiming eight lives, it serves only as proof that such toughness is necessary - in Rudd's language, it ''underlines the need for policy changes''. Certainly it's not evidence that the policy might not work: ''We also said that the people smugglers would in fact try to test our resolve,'' said Rudd in response to this boat. He'll say the same after every boat that sinks on his watch.That's the great paradox at the heart of this policy. It is justified entirely by the fact that it will work, but there is no way to demonstrate its failure. On its own terms it is utterly unfalsifiable. If the boats come in hordes, they're simply testing our resolve, which means we must stick with the plan and never give up. To do so would no doubt send a terrible ''message'' to people smugglers. This is a perpetual policy, impervious to data. At what point could we declare the policy a failure? At no point, if you believe the government. However many people arrive, that's how many we'll need to send away. And send them we will, because we have ''resolve''.All this would be fine if we were talking about an assumption that was undeniably true, or this were a policy of little human consequence. But we're not. We're talking about a supposition that deterrence is the only available means to stop people drowning at sea, and we're talking about deterrence measures that, frankly, destroy people: that lead them to suicide, self-harm, and as we learnt this week, being victims of rape. And for all that, still they come. Whatever the threshold of deterrence, it must be extraordinarily high. High enough that the prospect of death by drowning isn't even enough. But instead of questioning whether such hyper-deterrence is really possible, we keep reaching higher and higher for it.The central problem is that our public debate has never really come to grips with why it is people are coming on these boats. There's the rhetoric of queue-jumping, country shopping and evil people smugglers, but this is more bluster than insight. And you can see the confusion in Rudd's PNG solution. Once you get beyond the assertions about the people smugglers' ''product'' and ''business model'', a huge unanswered question remains: exactly who does the government think these boat people are?To say we can stop the boats by resettling their passengers in PNG is to say one of two inescapable things. First, that the boats will stop because these boat people are not really seeking protection from persecution, and are instead only after Australian residency; thus PNG (or anywhere else) will never do, even though it offers protection, simply because it isn't Australia. But that is to say they aren't really refugees. That doesn't square with the fact that the overwhelming majority of asylum seekers get refugee status.Alternatively we're saying the boats will cease because PNG is such a ghastly place so incapable of offering protection that a genuine refugee will refuse to go there. If that's the case, then we're clearly breaching the international obligations we're pretending to uphold by sending them somewhere incapable of protecting them.The government will accept neither of the interpretations I've given above, but seriously, what other interpretation is there? I've tried for days, and I can't think of one. Even its own explanation takes us nowhere. It says that whatever the case, people smugglers are offering resettlement in Australia: that is the ''product'' we're removing. But that's simply not enough. The question now is: what if they offer a different product, namely resettlement in PNG? Will they not take that? If not, why not?If we assume, as the data suggests, that asylum seekers are overwhelmingly genuine refugees, then there's simply no guarantee this will stop the boats. But even if it does, what exactly will we have achieved? We will say we've saved countless lives at sea. But we will also have done something else: left them with no option but one as bad as what they currently have. The option they think is worse than taking the risk of death. The option that is not outweighed even by the stories of abuse, suicide and mental illness in detention. The option that means they simply aren't offered protection at all. "], ["PNG asylum policy harsh, but may not succeed", "July 26, 2013", "176", " There's something about the font that dominates the federal government's new asylum seeker policy advertisements. Something about the harsh stencilling effect and the rough black markings that punctuate the stark, white letters. It's like it has been forged from metal: rugged, weathered, ultimately indestructible. ''You won't be settled in Australia''.It doesn't scream it. It simply declares it with a kind of close-minded, bureaucratic rigidity. It's not advising you. It's telling you, in a shockingly impersonal ''access denied'' sort of way. There's no point yelling back at it, because there's no one to yell at.That makes it tough. It's more than an affectation: it's a philosophy. The grammar of our public conversation simply assumes an asylum seeker policy must be tough to be effective. And since a policy of total exclusion is about as tough as it gets, this policy is as effective as it gets.This line of reasoning, it seems, is invincible. This week we learnt that Papua New Guinea's Prime Minister Peter O'Neill wanted asylum seekers ''to move around freely within the community'' rather than be confined to what, if SBS Dateline is to be believed, is a hellhole of a detention centre.That hellhole was our idea because we've made harshness the very point, the very mark of successful policy. That's why the opposition can find no criticism of the government's new policy as a matter of principle, and has resorted to talking about stopping boats with a three star military commander. Exactly what that commander will do is unclear and isn't the point. The point is that it is so tough it looks and sounds like war.But the austere facade masks that this reasoning is an entirely closed loop. For all our harshness, the boats have kept coming. But instead of taking stock, we decide this means we simply need to be harsher. So even as another boat sinks bound for Christmas Island, claiming probably dozens of lives, it serves only as proof that such toughness is necessary - in Kevin Rudd's language, it ''underlines the need for policy changes''. Certainly it's not evidence that the policy might not work: ''We also said that the people smugglers would in fact try to test our resolve,'' Rudd said in response to this boat. He'll say the same after every boat that sinks under his watch.That's the great paradox at the heart of this policy. It is justified entirely by the fact that it will work, but there is no way to demonstrate its failure.On its own terms it is utterly unfalsifiable. If the boats come in hordes, they're simply testing our resolve, which means we must stick with the plan and never give up. To do so would no doubt send a terrible ''message'' to people smugglers.This is a perpetual policy, impervious to data. At what point could we declare the policy a failure? At no point, if you believe the government. However many people arrive, that's how many we'll need to send away. And send them we will, because we have ''resolve''.All this would be fine if we were talking about an assumption that was undeniably true, or this were a policy of little human consequence. But we're not. We're talking about a supposition that deterrence is the only available means to stop people drowning at sea, and we're talking about deterrence measures that, frankly, destroy people: that lead them to suicide, self-harm and, as we learnt this week, becoming victims of rape. For all that, still they come.Whatever the threshold of deterrence, it must be extraordinarily high. High enough that the prospect of death by drowning isn't even enough. But instead of questioning whether such hyper-deterrence is really possible, we keep reaching higher and higher for it.The central problem is that our public debate has never come to grips with why it is people are coming on these boats. There's the rhetoric of queue-jumping, country shopping and evil people smugglers, but this is more bluster than insight. You can see the confusion in Rudd's PNG solution. Once you get beyond the assertions about the people smugglers' ''product'' and ''business model'', a huge unanswered question remains: who does the government think these boat people are?To say we can stop the boats by resettling their passengers in PNG, is to say one of two inescapable things. First, that the boats will stop because these boat people are not really seeking protection from persecution, and are instead only after Australian residency; thus PNG (or anywhere else) will never do, even though it offers protection simply because it isn't Australia. But that is to say they aren't really refugees. That doesn't square with the fact that the overwhelming majority of asylum seekers get refugee status.Alternatively we're saying the boats will cease because PNG is such a ghastly place so incapable of offering protection that a genuine refugee will refuse to go there. If that's the case, then we're breaching the international obligations we're pretending to uphold by sending them somewhere incapable of protecting them.The government will accept neither of the interpretations I've given above, but, seriously, what other interpretation is there? I've tried for days, and I can't think of one. Even its own explanation takes us nowhere. It says that, whatever the case, people smugglers are offering resettlement in Australia: that is the ''product'' we're removing.But that's simply not enough. The question now is: what if they offer a different product, namely resettlement in PNG? Will they not take that? If not, why not?If we assume, as the data suggests, that asylum seekers are overwhelmingly genuine refugees, then there's simply no guarantee this will stop the boats. But even if it does, what exactly will we have achieved?We will say we've saved countless lives at sea. But we will also have done something else: left them with no option but one as bad as what they currently have. The option they think is worse than taking the risk of death. The option that is not outweighed even by the stories of abuse, suicide and mental illness in detention. The option that means they aren't offered protection at all. "], ["Mursi: now a symbol of democratic failure", "July 12, 2013", "96", " Suppose Egypt held free and fair presidential elections tomorrow. Suppose Mohammed Mursi was free to contest, and suppose he won. What then? Would the millions of protesters who urged the military to depose him be suddenly converted? And if not, what would we make of their cries, knowing as we would that despite their impressive numbers, they represent an electoral minority?The fact is that if such an election were held tomorrow, it would take someone very brave, or very partisan, to guarantee Mursi would lose. And yet the military holds him under arrest, ostensibly on behalf of the people.There's no doubting the popular impetus for this but let's not pretend this is anything other than a military coup. The millions of Egyptians cheering the military's action don't change that. There's a difference between something that is popular and something that is democratic. And democratic change doesn't occur pre-emptively with the help of tanks.Democratic principles don't get more fundamental than that.It's important to be clear on this point because for decades the great fear of Middle Eastern democracy has been that it would deliver an Islamist government that would then proceed to dismantle that very same democracy. \"One man, one vote, one time,\" goes the saying. But the rich irony is that so much of the region's recent history points in the opposite direction, where a secular military has attempted (sometimes successfully) to subvert Islamist democracy. Think Turkey. Or Algeria. Now, Egypt.The problem with this line of thinking has always been that it plays to Islamism's strongest, and most dangerous, suit. It deprives Islamists of all democratic hope and positions them as liberators against an authoritarian regime. Islamist politics always works best in opposition, when it can talk the language of resistance and not be held to the test of delivering on its ideals.Egypt's Muslim Brotherhood can now talk that language once more. Its take-home message now seems to be that the entire system of democratic governance is stacked against it. Even when it wins, it loses. As the Algerian experience shows, that is hugely dangerous. In that case, the military dissolved parliament and annulled elections once the Islamist party looked set to win. The result was a decade-long Islamist insurgency that took about 150,000 lives.Now consider the Brotherhood's next move. Already it has decried \"the repressive practices of the police state\" and declared it will \"refuse to participate in any action with power usurpers\". It can't see its way to being involved in the political transition because it rejects the very fact of its existence. Maybe it will change its mind but what if it doesn't? Does anyone seriously expect it will give up on its pursuit of power after more than 80 years of trying and only one year of authority? More likely it will continue its involvement in politics by other, less democratic or conventional means.The fall of Hosni Mubarak was such a monumental moment in the region's history because it sent two colossal messages. First, that autocrats could be removed by the mobilisation of ordinary people without resorting to the revolutionary violence Islamist movements often declared necessary. Second, that if Islamists wanted political influence, they could have it by buying into the democratic process. In a stroke it seemed militant Islamism had run its course, having achieved no revolutionary change in its decades of carnage and having been left behind by the democratic impulse of the masses.As much could be seen in al-Qaeda's limp reaction to the uprisings. It was compelled to celebrate the fall of these dictators but could claim none of the credit. But in the past week, both these messages have been undermined.It's not true to say Egypt is simply back where it started two years ago. With what looks suspiciously like the military firing on a crowd of Islamist protesters in prayer, and with the Brotherhood leadership arrested, the truth is the country has now gone backwards. Then it was at least unified by a dream. Now it is hopelessly divided, apparently without even the most basic agreement that its differences will be resolved periodically at elections. Mursi made some enormous mistakes. Perhaps his first was to nominate for president in the first place when the Brotherhood promised it would not field a candidate.Once in power, he promised an economic recovery that was never going to happen. He issued, then retracted, a decree that made his executive decisions above the scrutiny of the courts and shoved through a constitution (via a hasty referendum) with an unnecessarily partisan flavour.This immediately alienated those sectors of society not sympathetic to his cause, guaranteeing a political environment of perpetual suspicion and protest. And that's to say nothing of the violence against religious minorities that occurred on his watch.But he should have been allowed to crash at an election. He might then have ended up a symbol of the Brotherhood's political failure. Now, to many, he'll be a symbol of democratic failure, with all that entails. In the meantime, the depth of Egyptian division means those who called for Mursi's head will eventually start calling for each other's, while the depth of its economic disaster (which was hardly Mursi's making) means no new president will be its saviour. If so, we'll be left to ask precisely what has been gained by all this. What will be much clearer, though, is what has been sacrificed. "], ["Fresh fire but using Gillard's ammo", "June 28, 2013", "252", " Do you have that hollow feeling, too? That feeling that after months, no, years of build-up, after the arrival of the final climax, there is something oddly underwhelming about the fact that Kevin Rudd has finally reclaimed the throne? It's not that this isn't a momentous development. It is. But after the incessant focus on whether or not this would happen, we're left with the question so many Labor MPs couldn't answer while they were vainly denying anything was going on: what exactly was that about?It certainly wasn't about integrity. Julia Gillard's magnificent concession speech revealed the person the public so rarely saw, but that her loyal colleagues clearly knew. This is very much unlike Rudd's axing in 2010, which we now know was mainly about Rudd's impossibly dysfunctional style of governance, which led much of the caucus to detest him. Gillard's colleagues like and respect her, but in the final act simply couldn't abide her diabolically bad polling. No doubt the data reflected her constant political missteps, but they also reflected Rudd's constant undermining of her. Now the man who contributed so much to making her prime ministership impossible, who has done so much to put Labor in this catastrophic position, has been rewarded with the leadership. He held the party to ransom, and ultimately got paid.This was sheer, bloody pragmatism. There's no central policy dispute or matter of principle at stake. Listen carefully to Bill Shorten's statement half an hour before the ballot: ''I have now come to the view that Labor stands the best chance to defend the legacies of this term of government, and to continue improving the lives of millions of Australians if Kevin Rudd is our leader,'' he explained. The emphasis is mine, but if you think about them, the italicised words are astonishing. The legacy he's protecting is Gillard's. His support for Rudd was, paradoxically, all about his admiration for the woman he helped eject from politics, a prime minister who has \"accomplished remarkable things'' - ''once-in-a-generation reforms'' no less, and ''in very difficult circumstances in a minority government''.That's one of the great ironies here. For now, the electorate clearly prefers Rudd to Gillard, and that's the only reason we now have him. But in policy terms, Gillard has the more impressive record. Rudd's time in office was frantic, but barren. Beyond his great symbolic moments (the apology and Kyoto), his biggest initiatives, such as the emissions trading scheme and his mining tax, fell over. His education revolution amounted to little - far less than Gillard's Gonski-inspired initiative. Gillard has her name on the national disability insurance scheme, the carbon tax and a newly negotiated, if deeply flawed, mining tax. She achieved a health funding deal with the states where Rudd couldn't. She has established a landmark wide-ranging royal commission on child sex abuse. Some of these (health, mining tax) were renewed, compromised versions of Rudd's failures. Others, (carbon tax, royal commission) were not her idea and were forced upon her. Still, her legacy is far more concrete than Rudd's.Rudd's one virtue is that he gives Labor the spectre of a chance in this year's election. Not necessarily even the chance to win so much as the chance not to be utterly destroyed. That's why his caucus supporters rarely have glowing things to say about him. Foreign Minister Bob Carr was more spirited on Lateline, celebrating Rudd as ''the leader who saved us from the GFC''. No doubt, that was Rudd's great practical achievement in office. But that was a response to circumstances, not an agenda.What is his agenda now? We know Rudd has long wanted the leadership, but to what end? The most emphatic reason he gave was to ''do what I can to prevent Mr Abbott from becoming prime minister''. Then came Shorten: \"I believe that Tony Abbott and his conservative Coalition represent a once-in-a-generation risk to the advancement of this nation and its peoples''. Then came Carr: \"Too much is at risk … [it's] overwhelmingly in Australia's interest that Tony Abbott not be our national leade''. It's no longer about what Labor will do. It's a little bit about what Labor has done - almost entirely under Gillard. But it's mostly about their stopping their opponents. Umpteen Labor voices have declared the importance of offering the Australian people a choice this year. But it's not yet clear exactly what that choice will be other than a choice between a man named Tony Abbott, and someone who isn't.The upshot is this: we're now witnessing a contest between two opposition leaders. More than that, it's a contest between the two best opposition leaders we have seen in decades. Rudd's 2007 dismantling of Howard was so clinical and thorough that he looked destined forever to be a Labor hero. Abbott hasn't so much dismantled Rudd and Gillard as destroyed them. But the fact both men are skilled in opposition is scarcely encouraging. It means both excel in the symbolism and sharply crafted critique that opposition rewards. But as Rudd so spectacularly demonstrated after 2007, opposition and government are entirely different enterprises.What we don't have is a leader. We don't have a government that can run energetically on its record, because while his colleagues might celebrate the NDIS and Gonski, Rudd simply doesn't own them, and will surely look ridiculous spruiking them. This is, in some ways, a re-run of 2010, when Gillard had no way of owning Rudd's economic management, so we didn't talk about it. The result that time was perhaps the most substance-free election campaign we've ever seen; one characterised by small ideas and mutual scare tactics. We might just be headed there again. "], ["At long last voters have a choice, but what is it?", "June 28, 2013", "155", " Do you have that hollow feeling, too? That feeling that after months, no, years of build-up, after the arrival of the final climax, there is something oddly underwhelming about the fact that Kevin Rudd has finally reclaimed the throne? It's not that this isn't a momentous development. It is. But after the incessant focus on whether or not this would happen, we're left with the question so many Labor MPs couldn't answer while they were vainly denying anything was going on: what exactly was that about?It certainly wasn't about integrity. Julia Gillard's magnificent concession speech revealed the person the public so rarely saw, but that her loyal colleagues clearly knew. This is very much unlike Rudd's axing in 2010, which we now know was mainly about Rudd's impossibly dysfunctional style of governance, which led much of the caucus to detest him.Gillard's colleagues like and respect her, but in the final act simply couldn't abide her diabolically bad polling. No doubt the data reflected her constant political missteps, but they also reflected Rudd's constant undermining of her. Now the man who contributed so much to making her premiership impossible, who has done so much to put Labor in this catastrophic position, has been rewarded with the leadership. He held the party to ransom, and ultimately got paid.This was sheer, bloody pragmatism. There's no central policy dispute or matter of principle at stake. Listen carefully to Bill Shorten's statement half an hour before the ballot. ''I have now come to the view that Labor stands the best chance to defend the legacies of this term of government, and to continue improving the lives of millions of Australians if Kevin Rudd is our leader,'' he explained. The emphasis is mine, but if you think about them, the italicised words are astonishing. The legacy he's protecting is Gillard's. His support for Rudd was, paradoxically, all about his admiration for the woman he helped eject from politics, a prime minister who has ''accomplished remarkable things'' - ''once in a generation reforms'' no less, and ''in very difficult circumstances in a minority government''.That's one of the great ironies here. For now, the electorate clearly prefers Rudd to Gillard, and that's the only reason we now have him. But in policy terms, Gillard has the more impressive record. Rudd's time in office was frantic, but barren. Beyond his great symbolic moments (the apology and Kyoto), his biggest initiatives like the emissions trading scheme fell over and his mining tax, fell over. His education revolution amounted to little - far less than Gillard's Gonski-inspired initiative. Gillard has her name on the national disability insurance scheme, the carbon tax and a newly negotiated, if deeply flawed, mining tax. She achieved a health-funding deal with the states where Rudd couldn't. She has established a landmark wide-ranging royal commission on child sex abuse. Some of these (health, mining tax) were renewed, compromised versions of Rudd's failures. Others, (carbon tax, royal commission) were not her idea and were forced upon her, either by public pressure or political arrangements. Still, her legacy is far more concrete than Rudd's.Rudd's one virtue is that he gives Labor the spectre of a chance in this year's election. Not necessarily even the chance to win so much as the chance not to be utterly destroyed. That's why his caucus supporters - new or old - rarely have glowing things to say about him. Generally, their comments begin and end with polling. Foreign Minister Bob Carr was more spirited on Lateline, celebrating Rudd as ''the leader who saved us from the GFC''. No doubt, that was Rudd's great practical achievement in office. But that was a response to circumstances, not an agenda.What is his agenda now? We know Rudd has long wanted the leadership, but to what end? The most emphatic reason he gave was to ''do what I can to prevent Mr Abbott from becoming prime minister''. Then came Shorten: ''I believe that Tony Abbott and his conservative coalition represent a once-in-a-generation risk to the advancement of this nation and its peoples.'' Then came Carr: ''Too much is at risk … (it's) overwhelmingly in Australia's interest that Tony Abbott not be our national leader''. It's no longer about what Labor will do. It's a little bit about what Labor has done - almost entirely under Gillard. But it's mostly about their stopping their opponents. Umpteen Labor voices have declared the importance of offering Australians a choice. But it's not yet clear exactly what that choice will be other than what seems to them to be most important: a choice between a man named Tony Abbott, and someone who isn't.The upshot is this: we're now witnessing a contest between two opposition leaders. More than that, it's a contest between the two best opposition leaders we have seen in decades. Rudd's 2007 dismantling of Howard was so clinical and thorough that he looked destined forever to be a Labor hero. Abbott hasn't so much dismantled Rudd and Gillard as destroyed them. But the fact that both men are skilled in opposition is scarcely encouraging. It means both excel in the symbolism and sharply crafted critique that opposition rewards. But as Rudd so spectacularly demonstrated after 2007, opposition and government are entirely different enterprises.What we don't have is a leader. We don't have a government that can run energetically on its record, because while his colleagues might celebrate the NDIS and Gonski, Rudd simply doesn't own them, and will surely look ridiculous spruiking them. That's why, when he thanks Gillard for her contribution, he emphasises the things she initiated as his deputy like the introduction of the Fair Work Act. This is, in some ways, a rerun of 2010, when Gillard had no way of owning Rudd's economic management, so we didn't talk about it. The result that time was perhaps the most substance-free election campaign we've ever seen; one characterised by small ideas and mutual scare tactics. We might just be headed there again. "], ["Young Turks bring refreshing shade of grey to nation's black and white divide", "June 14, 2013", "33", " You know something extraordinary is happening when sworn enemies are locking arms in solidarity. And right now in Turkey, something extraordinary is happening. Ultra-nationalists are uniting with the very Kurdish activists, whose rights they have so long denied, to face together the tear gas and water cannons the police are unleashing on them.Beside them are seasoned opposition supporters and young, urban Turks, children and adolescents, many of them with very shallow histories of political engagement.''Those who wanted to kill each other last week became - no exaggeration - comrades on the streets,'' wrote Turkish journalist Ece Temelkuran in New Statesman.The most transformational protests are often the product of wildly varied groups who agree on little except what they hate. Indeed that was very much the story of the Arab uprisings that continue to reverberate across the region. These protests are not quite of that revolutionary moment. There is no prospect of Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan being toppled. Even if he were it would hardly be the collapse of a decades-old dictatorship. But these protests are revolutionary in a different way. This might be the moment the fault lines of Turkish politics are radically recast.Until now, those fault lines have been abundantly clear. The classic power struggle is between what Turks often call ''White Turks'' and ''Black Turks'': a secular elite, led by the army, who see themselves as the defenders of Ataturk's nationalist legacy, and the more traditional, religiously inclined masses. The racial imagery is deliberate. White Turks are meant to be the equivalent of our own WASPs. They are socially empowered, overwhelmingly urban, wealthier and better educated.They have Western lifestyles, adopt Western modes of dress and drink Western alcohol. They also tend to look down on ''blacks'' as unrefined because of their religious commitments and cultural conservatism. The divide is bitter, enduring and never far from the surface.When one professor of international relations was asked this week about the rapidly changing nature of Istanbul as more upwardly mobile Black Turks take jobs there, he told The New York Times the city had ''been invaded by Anatolian peasants'' he regarded as ''uncultured''.Erdogan has scarcely pretended to be a unifying figure. ''Your brother Tayyip belongs to the Black Turks,'' he famously declared about 15 years ago. Little wonder the military has long wanted to destroy him.In 2008, for instance, it went to the Constitutional Court and asked it to ban Erdogan's Justice and Development Party (AKP) on the basis it was ''a focal point of anti-secular activities'' and was ''trying to turn the country into an Islamic state''.The case was lost, but the audacity of it was telling: This was nothing less than an attempt to remove a democratically elected government that only the previous year had won in a landslide. But this was merely an attempt to replicate its ''postmodern coup'' of a decade earlier, when it shut down the Islamist Welfare Party which had just formed a coalition government. Since 1960, the military has also carried out three more traditional coups. In its zeal to preserve Turkey's secular nationalism, the military has long arrogated to itself the power to subvert the democratic will.That has always been the basis of Erdogan's legitimacy. Whatever the secular elite want to say about him, and whatever threats the military wanted to make, he had the people demonstrably on his side.Erdogan has won elections for 10 years, and winning emphatically. The military had inherited privilege and an ideology to support it, but no popular mandate. This only became more important when Turkey's tilt at EU membership required it to enhance its democratic credentials and establish civilian control over the military. A Herculean task, but Erdogan carried it off.The high-water mark is surely the successful constitutional referendum held on the highly symbolic date of September 12, 2010 - exactly 30 years after the 1980 military coup. This sent military power into serious retreat because among its suite of reforms it abolished the legal protection enjoyed by coup leaders. Plotting a coup would be a crime against the state, prosecuted in civilian courts. This was perhaps the most significant liberal democratic reform in Turkey's history, and it left the military nowhere to go.It's a story that confounds Western notions that secularism is always liberal and freedom-enhancing, and religious politics is always on the side of authoritarianism. Here, authoritarianism was secularism's handmaiden. To be liberal and democratic was to vote with the Black Turks. But now that story is starting to unravel. Now Erdogan is the one striking a dictatorial pose. After a period of remarkable improvement - marked by a significant decline in torture and the recognition of the cultural rights of the Kurdish minority - Turkey's human rights record is regressing.Turkey now has more journalists in prison than any other country, for instance. Many of them haven't been charged. A mandatory internet filtering regime is in place. Opposition politicians and human rights lawyers have been arrested and imprisoned. Now they're gassing protesters.''They are drunk with power,'' one academic observer says of Erdogan's government. ''They lost their democratic reflexes and are returning to what is the essence of Turkish politics: authoritarianism.''That's what these protests - which began with a sit-in against a planned shopping mall - are really about. The old secular/religious division is falling away now. There are not just White Turks and Black Turks any more. Amid the diverse fray we're witnessing the arrival of something Turkish politics has never really seen but desperately needs.Meet the Grey Turks: young, urban, well educated, not necessarily secular, but definitely democratic. "]]